Meeting june 19, 2023
file: 41500 20
council report
to: mayor & council
from: general manager planning and development
subject: housing choices final program for phase 1a and
scope for phase 1b
purpose: to obtain council approval for the final program for housing choices
phase 1a, and the scope and schedule for phase 1b.
Recommendations
1. That the final program for housing choices phase 1a, to permit laneway homes
and secondary suites in semi-detached homes on properties with lanes, and on
corner lots and through lots, in burnabys single and two family neighbourhoods, be
approved;
that staff is directed to bring forward a report outlining the bylaw amendments
required to implement the final program for housing choices phase 1a, concurrently
with the necessary amendment bylaw.
2. That the proposed scope and schedule for housing choices phase 1b, to permit
laneway homes and secondary suites in semi-detached homes on properties without
lanes, and additional housing types with three or four units on all properties in single
and two family neighbourhoods, be approved; and
that staff be authorized to prepare a report outlining tools for retention of heritage
resources in single and two family neighbourhoods.
Chief administrative officers comments
i concur with the recommendation of the general manager planning and development.
Executive summary
this report seeks council approval for the final program for laneway homes and suites
in semi-detached homes on properties with lanes. It also seeks council approval on the
scope and schedule for the next phase of the housing choices program, to expand lot
eligibility to properties without lanes, as well as introducing other forms of housing to
single and two family neighbourhoods.
1.0 policy section
the housing choices program generally aligns with the following council adopted
plans, reports and policies: corporate strategic plan (2022), official community plan
(1998), home: burnabys housing and homelessness strategy (2021), burnabys
attachment 2
subject: housing choices final program for phase 1a and scope for phase 1b
open council meeting june 19, 2023........................................... Page 2
housing needs report (2021), and the mayors task force on community housing
final report (2019).
2.0 background
housing choices is a city program to introduce more housing variety to burnabys
single and two-family neighbourhoods. The program was set up to implement one of the
actions from burnabys 10-year housing action plan (home: burnabys housing and
homelessness strategy), adopted by council on december 6, 2021.
On february 27, 2023, council approved the draft program for phase 1a of housing
choices. Phase 1a focuses on permitting laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes on single and two-family properties with lanes. In march and april 2023, staff
shared the draft program with the public. The feedback received has been considered in
preparing the recommended final program for phase 1a, which is presented in section
3.1 of this report.
When the housing choices program was first launched in february 2022, council
requested that staff expand phase 1 to include additional small-scale housing types in
advance of the official community plan update. These additional housing types will be
introduced in phase 1b. A proposed scope of work and schedule for phase 1b of
housing choices is presented in section 3.2 of this report.
3.0 general information
3.1 phase 1a: laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes
phase 1a: program update
the draft program for phase 1a was approved by council on february 27, 2023, and
presented to the public in open houses in march 2023. Following public consultation,
several changes are being recommended to the draft program, to improve livability
and make it easier to build these types of housing. These changes are outlined
below.
Changes to the draft program:
lot eligibility: reducing the minimum lot width and area required to build a semidetached home or duplex in the r4 and r5 zoning districts. This will enable
more properties in two-family zones to build semi-detached and duplex homes.
Semi-detached floor area: removing the restrictions on floor area that were
previously applied to the top storey of a two-storey semi-detached home. This will
make it easier to provide upstairs bedrooms in semi-detached homes.
Semi-detached ground level suites: changing accessible basement suites
in semi-detached homes to ground level suites that meet the saferhomes
universal design standard. The elevation of these suites to ground level will allow
for greater accessibility and livability. Universal design focuses on creating
barrier-free living spaces for all ages and abilities.
Subject: housing choices final program for phase 1a and scope for phase 1b
open council meeting june 19, 2023........................................... Page 3
removing cellars: prohibiting cellars in laneway homes and semi-detached
homes. Basements will be permitted (as shown in the draft program) but cellars
will not be permitted. The difference between a cellar and a basement is that a
basement has more of its height above ground (a basement has more than 50%
of its height above ground whereas a cellar has more than 50% of its height
below ground). Basements are preferred over cellars as they provide more light
and livable space for occupants.
Laneway home minimum size: increasing the minimum size of a laneway
home to 32.52 m2 (350 sq. Ft. ). This change is to increase livability and align with
concurrent proposed changes to minimum unit sizes in burnaby.
Laneway home height: changing the building height calculation method. The
height of a laneway home will be measured from the lowest point on the
perimeter of the laneway home. The lowest point will be the lower of the natural
or finished grade. This will reduce the potential height of a laneway home on
sloping lots and will help to protect views.
Laneway home fire access: adding a maximum distance from a street for
siting laneway homes without sprinkler systems. Laneway homes without
sprinkler systems must be located within 45 metres of a street. This will better
support fire safety and access, as fire hoses have a limited reach from the fire
truck.
Bike storage: removing the proposed below-height bike locker floor area
exemption. Instead, bike storage sheds may be added under the current
regulations as an accessory building. The floor area of an accessory building will
not count towards the floor area of the laneway home or the principal home. Bike
storage within a carport or a smaller bikeport will also be encouraged and will
not be counted as floor area.
Phase 1a: final program
the final program for phase 1a is presented in (attachment 1). This includes all of
the recommended changes outlined above.
Phase 1a: next steps
if the final program for phase 1a, as presented in (attachment 1), is approved by
council, the bylaw amendments required to support the program will be advanced to
council in july, with the opportunity for final adoption at the subsequent council
meeting in late august. Shortly after final adoption, eligible property owners will be
able to apply for a building permit to build laneway homes and suites in semidetached homes.
3.2 phase 1b: additional housing types for all single and two family lots
phase 1b: program update
phase 1b will expand eligibility for laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes to properties without lanes, as well as permit additional housing forms with
three or four units on single and two family lots.
Subject: housing choices final program for phase 1a and scope for phase 1b
open council meeting june 19, 2023........................................... Page 4
in april 2023, the bc government announced a homes for people (hfp) plan that
includes proposals to loosen zoning restrictions in single and two family lots across
the province. This may mean permitting up to three or four dwelling units on all
single and two family lots, depending on the lot type, and potentially more units in
locations that are close to transit. These proposals have the potential to align well
with phase 1b of the housing choices program. Additional details are anticipated
from the province in the fall. At that time, where feasible, provincial legislation will be
incorporated into the planning process for phase 1b.
Phase 1b: scope
the proposed scope for phase 1b includes the following items:
permitting laneway homes on properties without lanes;
permitting suites in semi-detached homes on properties without lanes;
permitting additional configurations for three or four units on single and twofamily lots, with or without lanes. These may include permitting:
o single-family homes with two suites;
o duplexes and semi-detached homes in more zone districts and on smaller lots;
o triplexes;
o fourplexes;
o cottage courts (3 or 4 detached units on a lot);
o duplex and semi-detached laneway homes; and
o secondary suites in the above housing forms.
Considering the appropriate mix of strata and rental housing units;
considering new incentives for properties on the heritage inventory to encourage
retention of heritage buildings;
responding to anticipated provincial legislation which may require permitting
additional units on eligible properties near frequent transit; and
making minor revisions to phase 1a regulations, if required. These will respond to
feedback from the initial intake of building permits for laneway homes and suites
in semi-detached homes.
Phase 1b: schedule
the proposed schedule for phase 1b is as follows:
june 2023 seek council approval of phase 1b scope and schedule (this report)
july/aug 2023 conduct a public survey on housing types for phase 1b
sept 2023 incorporate provincial housing legislation (if available)
oct/nov 2023 set out the draft program for phase 1b
dec/jan 2023 consult with the public on the draft program for phase 1b
feb 2024 seek council approval on the final program for phase 1b
march 2024 amend city bylaws to implement the final program for phase 1b
phase 1b: next steps
subject: housing choices final program for phase 1a and scope for phase 1b
open council meeting june 19, 2023........................................... Page 5
if the scope and schedule for phase 1b are approved by council as recommended
in this report, staff will immediately start this work. The first step will be to launch a
public survey on the housing types for phase 1b. This survey will be made available
to the public over the summer.
3.3 housing choices: retention of heritage resources
the final program recommended for phase 1a, and introduction of additional
housing options in phase 1b, has implications for the retention of heritage homes.
Local governments in bc can provide incentives to property owners to protect a
heritage resource, including entering into heritage revitalization agreements
(hras). Hras provide for variances to the zoning bylaw in consideration of
retention, conservation, and designation of heritage building. The city maintains an
inventory of heritage resources considered to have heritage value and potential
eligibility for an hra. This heritage inventory is updated as resources are protected
or demolished.
Excluding city-owned properties, there are currently 90 heritage resources listed in
the inventory. Of those, 61 are buildings located in r residential zone districts. 25 of
those 61 buildings are located in r4 and r5 districts and do not meet the current
zoning bylaw requirements for a two-family home. However, with the reduction in
minimum lot size for two-family homes, which is recommended for the phase 1a
program, these 25 lots could redevelop with a semi-detached home with two
secondary suites.
The proposed change would provide an incentive for the owners of these 25
properties to redevelop their lot to maximize the permitted density. The city is
currently losing more homes on the heritage inventory to demolition than are being
retained through hras. Since january 2021, three privately owned residential
heritage resources have received demolition permits. Only two applications for
retention of residential heritage resources through an hra were advanced to
council during the same period.
Staff are currently completing a review of the citys heritage policies and programs,
including the citys use of tools available under the local government act for
retention of heritage resources. The intent of the review is to inform the policy
recommendations of the official community plan (ocp) update. However, as
housing policy updates are being made in advance of the ocp update, it is
recommended that council authorize staff to prepare a report outlining tools that the
city could implement to retain heritage resources in residential neighbourhoods
concurrent to advancing the housing choices program.
4.0 communication and community engagement
community engagement for the housing choices program began in spring 2022. A
dedicated project webpage was established at that time. As of may 15, 2023, the project
webpage has been accessed 27,220 times, by a total of 17,402 users.
Subject: housing choices final program for phase 1a and scope for phase 1b
open council meeting june 19, 2023........................................... Page 6
phase 1a included three rounds of community engagement and directly involved over
4,000 people. Events included two public surveys, three virtual workshops, one inperson workshop and three open houses. A summary of what we heard was provided in
reports to council on may 30, 2022 and february 27, 2023. A final round of engagement
was held in spring 2023 to present the draft program to the public before finalizing the
details. A summary of what we heard is presented in (attachment 2).
Engagement for phase 1b will begin with a survey on the housing types and forms that
are being considered for this phase. Information collected from this survey will be
considered in conjunction with the anticipated provincial housing legislation to develop a
draft program for phase 1b.
5.0 financial considerations
as more housing units are introduced to burnabys neighbourhoods through the
housing choices program, there will be costs to upgrade lane infrastructure and provide
ongoing servicing. Supplementary annual utility fees will be levied to pay for annual
sewer, water and garbage collection services. Additional information on servicing
upgrade costs and utility fees is provided in (attachment 1).
Funding for infrastructure and policy development to support new housing units created
through the housing choices program may be available through the canada mortgage
and housing corporation (cmhc) housing accelerator fund (haf). Cmhc has
identified burnaby as a growth leader within the large/urban stream and the city will be
submitting its haf application in advance of the summer intake.
Respectfully submitted,
e. W. Kozak, general manager planning and development
attachments
attachment 1 housing choices phase 1a: final program
attachment 2 housing choices phase 1a: summary of feedback on the draft program
report contributors
this report was prepared by sarah crawford, planner 2, and reviewed by lily ford,
planner 3, carl isaak, director community planning, and lee-ann garnett, deputy
general manager planning and development.
Attachment 1. Phase 1a: final program
this attachment provides details of the final program for housing choices: phase 1a, to
introduce laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes to single and two family
properties on lanes in burnaby.
A how-to guide will be prepared to assist residents in understanding these
regulations. A frequently asked questions (faq) section is also available on the housing
choices website (www. Burnaby. Ca/housingchoices). Any questions may be directed to
housingchoices@burnaby. Ca.
Details of the final program are provided in the following sections:
1.0 laneway homes
2.0 suites in semi-detached homes
3.0 additional information
1.0 laneway homes
final program for phase 1a: laneway homes
zoning
districts
r1, r2, r3, r4, r5, r6, r9, r10, r11, r12 and rm6.
Eligible lots eligible lots must have:
a single-family home; and
vehicular access to the rear yard from the side or rear of the property, via an open lane or
residential street.
Notes:
1. Corner lots or double frontage lots (through lots) that do not have access to an open
lane will require access approval from the engineering department.
2. If a lot is near a stream, streamside protection and enhancement area regulations may
limit the ability to construct a laneway home. (see section 6.23 of the zoning bylaw)
units per lot eligible lots may have up to 3 units. These may include a single family home with a
secondary suite, and a laneway home.
Tenure a lot with a laneway home must remain under a single title. This means that a laneway
home cannot be stratified or otherwise subdivided, and cannot be sold separately from
the main home.
A laneway home may be rented out as a long term rental unit. Short term rentals will not
be permitted in laneway homes.
The owner will not be required to live on the property. If the owner lives off-site, an annual
house rental business license will be required. Only one license will be required per lot.
Floor area maximum floor area for a laneway home:
up to 20% of the lot area, but no larger than 140 m2 (1,507 sq. Ft. ).
Minimum floor area for a laneway home:
32.52 m2 (350 sq. Ft. )
notes:
1. The floor area calculation for a laneway home will exclude:
floor area of the principal dwelling
floor area of carports that are attached to the laneway home
floor area of any accessory buildings that are not attached to the laneway home (e. G.
Garages, sheds, workshops, bike sheds/lockers)
height maximum height for a laneway home:
no more than 2 storeys; and
up to 7.6 m (24.9 ft. ) for a sloping roof; or
up to 6.7 m (22 ft. ) for a flat roof.
Notes:
1. The height of a laneway home will be measured from the lowest point on the perimeter of
the laneway home. The lowest point will be the lower of the natural or finished grade.
2. A laneway home cannot exceed the maximum height permitted for the principal dwelling,
as provided in the zoning bylaw.
3. Basements are permitted in laneway homes and will count as one storey.
Location on
the lot
a laneway home must be located in the rear yard.
Minimum setbacks for the laneway home:
2.4 m (7.87 ft. ) from the main house
2.4 m (7.87 ft. ) from a detached garage or other accessory building
1.2 m (3.94 ft. ) from the rear lot line
1.2 m (3.94 ft. ) from the side lot line
notes:
1. On a corner lot, the rear yard is the area furthest from the front lot line. The front lot line is
usually the narrowest street frontage.
2. On a corner lot, the side yard setback from the flanking street will be the same as for the
main house.
3. On a double-fronted lot (also called a through lot) there is technically no rear yard, so a
laneway home should be located behind the main residence.
4. If a lot is near a street/lane intersection, the regulations to maintain vision clearance at
intersections may impact the siting of a laneway home (zoning bylaw section 6.13).
5. An unsprinklered laneway home may not be located further than 45m (147.64 ft. ) from a
lot line abutting a road.
Lot coverage 45% maximum for buildings/structures
70% maximum for impervious surfaces
parking 1 parking space will be required on the property. This must be uncovered or in a carport,
and meet the city standard for a van accessible parking space.
Notes:
1. The parking space may be located within the side yard setback, subject to vision
clearance at intersection regulations (zoning bylaw section 6.13).
2. The parking area must include an energized outlet capable of providing level 2 charging
for an electric vehicle.
3. Additional parking spaces may be provided on the property but will not be required.
These may be uncovered, in a carport, or in a garage.
4. Parking/storage for bikes, strollers etc. May be provided in detached accessory buildings,
attached bikeports or bike lockers.
Environmental
design
laneway homes must meet bc energy step code level 3
notes:
1. Laneway homes are considered part 9 residential buildings under the bc building code.
As of may 1, 2023, step code level 3 is the new provincial standard for all part 9
buildings.
2. An additional 0.5 m (1.64 ft. ) in height may be permitted to support passive house, net
zero, or bc energy step code 5 buildings.
Outdoor
space
trees must be retained or replaced as per the burnaby tree bylaw. Additional
information is provided in section 3.0 of this attachment.
Private outdoor space for the laneway home will be encouraged: a minimum 4 m2 (43.06
sq. Ft. ) private patio or minimum 3 m2 (32.29 sq. Ft. ) deck or balcony.
Access/
addressing
a minimum 0.9m (3 ft. ) wide pathway is required from the street to the laneway home.
An apartment-style address will be added to the main address to identify laneway homes
(e. G. L1-1234 main street).
Servicing and
utilities
separate sewer, water and power services.
An annual supplementary utility fee will be charged for a laneway home. Additional
information is provided in section 3.0 of this attachment.
Application
process
building permit
a how-to guide will be provided to assist with building permit applications.
A preapproved design library will be set up to accompany the program. Additional
information is provided in section 3.0 of this attachment.
Heritage exceptions to these regulations may be considered to preserve heritage buildings, through
the heritage revitalization agreement process.
2.0 suites in semi-detached homes
final program for phase 1a: suites in semi-detached homes
zoning districts r4, r5, r6, r12 and rm6.
Eligible lots to add a semi-detached home in the r4, r5, r6 or rm6 districts a lot must be at least:
557.4 m2 (6,000 sq. Ft. ) and 15.0 m (49.2 ft. ) wide.
To add a semi-detached home in the r12 district a lot must be at least:
306.57 m2 (3,300 sq. Ft. ) and 9.15 m (30 ft. ) wide on lots with lanes, or
306.57 m2 (3,300 sq. Ft. ) and 13.7 m (45 ft. ) wide on lot without lanes.
To add secondary suites to a semi-detached home, an eligible lot must have:
a semi-detached home (two attached units placed side-by-side or front-to-back).
Vehicular access to the rear yard from the side or rear of the property, via an open lane
or residential street.
Maximum
dwelling units
per property
eligible lots may have up to 4 units: two semi-detached units, each with one secondary suite
per unit.
Ownership a semi-detached home may be stratified into two primary units (each side may be sold
separately). However, a secondary suite may not be separately stratified (sold
separately) from a primary unit.
A secondary suite may be rented out as a long term rental unit. Short term rentals will
not be permitted in secondary suites.
The owner will not be required to live on the property. If the owner lives off-site, an
annual house rental business license will be required.
Floor area maximum floor area for a secondary suite:
there will be no maximum floor area for a secondary suite, but it must be contained
within a semi-detached unit.
Ground level suites, and basements containing secondary suites, may be added to a
two-storey semi-detached home. The floor area of the secondary suite will not count
toward the total floor area permitted for the semi-detached home.
Minimum floor area for a secondary suite:
32.52 m2 (350 sq. Ft. )
notes:
1. A ground level suite means a suite at or below ground level with an accessible path to
the front door that is certified as meeting universal design standards. See additional
details in section 3.0.
2. The floor area of a basement or ground level suite must be no greater than the floor area
of the storey above.
3. The top floor of a semi-detached home has no maximum size, but must be at least one
third of the permitted above grade floor area.
Maximum
height
semi-detached homes that include a suite:
two storeys plus basement; and
up to 9.0 m (29.5 ft. ) for a sloping roof or 7.4 m (24.3 ft. ) for a flat roof.
Semi-detached homes that include a ground level suite:
two storeys plus ground level suite; and
up to 10.5m (34.4 ft. ) for a sloping roof, or 8.9m (29.2 ft. ) for a flat roof.
Setbacks setbacks for semi-detached homes will be as per existing zoning bylaw regulations.
Lot coverage as per existing zoning bylaw regulations
70% maximum for impervious surfaces
parking 2 parking spaces will be required on the property (one per side of the semi-detached
home). These must be uncovered or in a carport.
Parking spaces for suites must meet the city standard for an accessible parking space.
Parking spaces for ground level suites should meet the city standard for a van
accessible parking space.
Environmental
design
step code level 3
outdoor space as per the burnaby tree bylaw. Additional information is provided in section 3.0 of this
attachment.
Private outdoor space for each suite will be encouraged: minimum 4 m2 (43.06 sq. Ft. ).
Access/
addressing
s suffixes will be added to the main address to identify secondary suites. (e. G. S1- 1234 main
street).
Servicing and
utilities
servicing for secondary suites in semi-detached homes will be as per secondary suites
in single-family homes.
An annual supplementary utility fee will be charged for each secondary suite that is
rented out. Additional information is provided in section 3 of this attachment.
Application
process
building permit
a how-to guide will be provided to assist with the application process.
A pre-approved design library will be set up to accompany the program. Additional
information is provided in section 3.0 of this attachment.
3.0 additional information
this section provides additional details for implementing phase 1a of the housing
choices program. This includes:
1. Infrastructure upgrades
2. Trees and green space
3. Universal design standards
4. Pre-approved designs
5. Supplementary utility fees
1. Infrastructure upgrades
as laneway homes have their main access facing the back lane of the property, careful
assessment of lane conditions and standards must be incorporated to ensure the
infrastructure associated with these housing types meet the appropriate levels of
service.
Lane infrastructure may include upgrading to formal drainage systems (storm sewers,
catch basins, etc. ) rather than ditches with driveway culverts, pavement rehabilitation
and surface works such as full width lane paving, curbs, as well concrete letdowns on
either side of the lane. Consideration must also be given to proper lighting, garbage
collection, and pedestrian and vehicular movements in the lane.
Based on historical construction costs, it is estimated that lane upgrades would be in the
range of $2,000 to $3,000 per linear metre. It is important to note that these costs do
not include other features to address site specific conditions such as fencing, steepness
and grade differentials requiring structural walls between the property and the lane,
and/or other environmental factors.
2. Protecting trees and green space
as the housing choices program progresses, protection of burnabys trees will be
challenging. The tree bylaw is currently being reviewed and this is expected to be
completed by the end of this year. However, under current legislation (bc community
charter) the tree bylaw cannot prevent development of a lot in accordance with the
density allowed under the zoning bylaw.
The final program for phase 1a includes minimal setbacks and lowered parking
requirements to maximize the options for locating buildings, and make it easier to retain
existing trees. Reductions to front setbacks are also being considered for phase 1b
which will provide additional options for building placement. The existing maximum lot
coverage requirement of 45% has been retained to try to protect greenspace, tree roots
and manage stormwater runoff. The impervious surface maximum of 70% is also
retained.
The tree bylaw can be used to require fees, tree-cutting permits and replacement trees
or contributions to the civic tree reserve fund for planting new trees on public lands.
As part of the review, options are being considered to maintain the goal of no net loss of
trees, and if possible, net gain, via replacement tree planting.
3. Universal design standard
semi-detached homes containing suites that meet a universal design standard will be
provided with additional height to elevate these suites to ground level. This will result in
a three-level home where all of the living space is fully above ground. The objective is to
encourage the development of more rental suites in the city that can be used to the
greatest extent possible, regardless of age, size, ability or disability.
Universal design is a set of features, principles and strategies that can be incorporated
into the design and construction of a home, to allow it to be adapted easily and costeffectively to keep pace with changing needs. Universally designed houses allow their
occupants to live safely, comfortably and independently in their home as they age,
without the need for any costly upgrades or renovations. (cmhc information on the
saferhome standard, 2017).
To demonstrate that a suite has been built to a universal design standard, applicants will
be asked to provide certification from the saferhome standards society as part of the
building permit process. This standard is used by bc housing and has been
recommended by the rick hansen foundation. The saferhome standards society
keeps a registry of all of the units that have been certified as meeting the universal
design standard in bc, including laneway homes and secondary suites. This will be
useful in tracking rental units in burnaby that have been built to a universal design
standards. See www. Saferhomestandards. Com for additional details on this standard.
4. Pre-approved designs
a pre-approved design library will be set up to accompany the program. Plans for
laneway homes or semi-detached homes with suites that have been permitted by the
city, and that meet key city policy objectives, and/or demonstrate best practices will be
added to a public design library following occupancy, and be available for purchase from
the designer. Examples of key objectives are universal design standards, or higher
levels of the bc energy step code or zero carbon step code.
Building permit applications that use designs from the preapproved design library may
receive faster approval than other designs.
5. Supplementary utility fees
i) laneway homes
utility charges for laneway homes will be levied as follows:
if there is an existing flat rate service for the primary residential property,
waterworks and sanitary sewer utility fees will be levied for the laneway home upon
receipt of an occupancy permit for the laneway home:
o utility fees for the laneway home will be charged for the calendar year,
less the portion of the year before the laneway home occupancy permit
was issued;
o an additional utility notice will be issued to the property owner to reflect
the laneway home;
o ongoing fees will be applied annually, and issued each january to the
property owner on the annual utility notice;
o service disconnection: no adjustment will be made to utility fees for a
period of 28 days following receipt of the disconnection request or notice
of issuance of a demolition permit.
If there is no existing flat rate service for the property, waterworks and sanitary
sewer utility charges will be levied for the property in two parts:
o utility fees for the main house will be charged for the calendar year, less
the portion of the year before the building permit for the main house was
issued;
o utility fees for the laneway home will be charged for the calendar year,
less the portion of the year before the laneway home occupancy permit
home was issued;
o additional utility notices will be issued to the property owner to reflect each
change in status;
o ongoing fees are applied annually, and issued each january to the
property owner on the annual utility notice;
o service disconnection: no adjustment will be made to utility fees for a
period of 28 days following receipt of the disconnection request or notice
of issuance of a demolition permit.
Utility rates water and sewer:
utility rates for a laneway home will match the rates listed in the citys
consolidated fees bylaw for single family dwellings with a rental suite.
Charges will be levied on a per unit basis
single family dwelling laneway
home example based on
current 2023 rental suite rates
paid by march 15 paid after march
15
laneway home water $309.86 $326.17
laneway home - sewer $293.80 $308.45
combined $602.89 $634.62
utility rates garbage
property owners will not be required to add a new container;
however, owners will be asked to upsize to a 360 litre receptacle before
obtaining an additional container for the laneway home;
standard residential garbage rates will apply, based on the size of container
provided;
garbage will be billed annually to the property owner in january as part of the
utility notice;
garbage fees are not pro-rated during the year. Any changes will be in effect
from january 1 of the next calendar year.
Ii) suites in semi-detached homes
utility charges for suites in semi-detached homes will follow the process that is
currently in place for suites in single-family homes.
Property owners will only be charged supplementary utility fees if their suite(s)
are rented;
owners will be required to submit a supplementary utility fees declaration form to
declare the rental status of each suite.
Utility rates for water and sewer:
rates for suites in semi-detached homes are currently listed in the citys
consolidated fees bylaw, under rented suite in a two family dwelling.
Charges will be levied on a per unit basis.
Suite in a two family dwelling
example based on current 2023
rental suite rates
paid by march 15 paid after march
15
suite water $232.37 $244.60
suite - sewer $219.22 $230.76
combined $451.59 $475.36
utility rates for garbage:
property owners will not be not required to add a new container;
property owners may have one toter per side of a semi-detached home, to a
maximum of 360 litres;
standard residential garbage rates will apply, based on the size of container
provided;
garbage is billed annually to the property owner in january as part of the utility
notice;
garbage fees are not pro-rated during the year. Any changes will be in effect
from january 1 of the next calendar year.
Attachment 2:
housing choices phase 1a: summary of feedback on the draft
program
1.0 introduction
this report provides a summary of feedback from engagement on the draft program for housing
choices phase 1a. This phase focuses on introducing laneway homes and secondary suites in
semi-detached homes to burnabys single and two family properties on lanes.
This was the third and final round of public engagement for phase 1a of the housing choices
program. The objectives of this engagement were to check in with the public on the draft
regulations, to raise awareness of the draft regulations, and to provide an opportunity to collect
any final feedback before the program was finalized.
2.0 engagement summary
feedback on the draft program was collected through a public survey and two open houses.
Public survey: a public survey was available on the city of burnaby website from march 27
until april 10, , 2023. The survey was advertised through newspaper advertisements, social
media (facebook, twitter, instagram), at the open houses and via email to residents who had
signed up to receive updates on the project. There were a total of 276 responses to the survey.
Respondents were able to answer sections on the proposed regulations for laneway homes,
suites in semi-detached homes, or both. 91 respondents only answered the section on laneway
homes, 7 respondents only answered the section on suites in semi-detached homes, and 177
respondents answered both sections.
Open houses: the city hosted two open houses on the draft program. The first was held on
march 28, 2023 at the confederation senior centre. The second was held at the bonsor
recreation centre on march 29, 2023. Presentation boards explaining the draft program were
displayed and city staff were available to answer questions. The presentation boards were also
made available on the housing choices website. Over 900 people attended the open houses.
Attendees at the open houses were invited to submit written comments after reviewing the
presentation boards and discussing the program with staff. Dropboxes were provided for private
comments. Public comments could be added to the boards using sticky notes. There were 56
dropbox comments and 73 sticky notes comments received.
3.0 what we heard
feedback received on the draft program has been organized into three categories: laneway
homes, suites in semi-detached homes, and written comments on the draft program.
3.1 laneway homes
laneway homes: feedback from the survey
there were 268 responses to the laneway homes section of the survey. Respondents were
provided with information on the draft program regulations and asked to indicate their level of
support for key aspects of the draft program. The chart below summarizes the level of support
for the overall draft program, in addition to specific regulations on tenure, parking, height, size
and lot eligibility.
*note: there were 265 individuals that chose to answer these questions in the survey. This chart
only includes those who answered these questions.
There was a majority of support for all of the key elements of the draft program. The highest
level of support was for the regulations regarding lot eligibility for phase 1a housing types, with
78% either strongly supporting or somewhat supporting this regulation. The lowest level of
support was for the regulations for parking, with 63% either strongly supporting or somewhat
supporting the draft program regulations. Support for height, size and tenure regulations for
laneway homes received 74%, 73% and 69% respectively.
Respondents were also asked to indicate their level of overall support for the draft program for
laneway homes. 77% of respondents stated that they strongly supported or somewhat
supported the overall program.
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
eligible lots
size
height
parking
tenure
overall
laneway homes draft program*
strongly support somewhat support neutral somewhat oppose strongly oppose
3.2 suites in semi-detached homes
suites in semi-detached homes: feedback from the survey
there were 184 responses to the suites in semi-detached homes section of the survey.
Respondents were asked to indicate their level of support for key aspects of the draft program.
The chart below summarizes the level of support for the overall draft program, in addition to
specific regulations on tenure, parking, suite size and lot eligibility.
*note: there were 180 individuals that chose to answer these questions in the survey. The chart
only includes those who answered these questions.
There was a majority of support for all of the key elements of the draft program. The highest
level of support was for the regulations regarding the size of secondary suites, with 79% either
strongly supporting or somewhat supporting this regulation. The lowest level of support was for
the regulations for parking, with 60% either strongly supporting or somewhat supporting the
draft program. Support for regulations on tenure and lot eligibility for suites in semi-detached
homes received 78% and 76% respectively.
Respondents were also asked to indicate their overall level of support for the draft program for
suites in semi-detached homes. 74% of respondents stated that they strongly supported or
somewhat supported the overall program.
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
eligible lots
size
parking
tenure
overall
suites in semis draft program*
strongly support somewhat support neutral somewhat oppose strongly oppose
3.3 written comments
survey respondents were invited to provide additional comments on the draft program for
laneway homes. Comments were not mandatory. Comments from the survey were combined
with written comments that were posted in drop boxes at the open houses, or added to the
presentation boards.
Some people submitted multiple comments, or single comments referencing different aspects of
the program. Many of the comments were general in nature, relating to the overall program and
process. These comments are reflected in the quantitative data. Comments on the regulations
were summarized and categorized by subject matter, and then analyzed by frequency. There
were 428 comments in total. Comments on the regulations that were received four or more
times are shown in the table below.
# summary of comments on program elements frequency
1 more parking should be required on the property 45
2 less/no parking should be required on the property 24
3 allow on lots without rear lanes 22
4 homes should be bigger 18
5 stratification should be allowed 15
6 costs/housing is too expensive 14
7 allow duplexes on smaller lots 13
8 living space should be above ground 13
9 attached garages should not count in size calculation 9
10 do not allow short term rentals 6
11 homes should be taller 6
12 more lot coverage should be allowed 6
13 owners should live on-site 6
14 views should be protected 6
15 homes should be lower in height 5
16 minimum suite size is too small 5
17 allow laneway homes on duplex lots 4
18 allow short term rentals 4
19 homes should be smaller 4
20 support for pre-approved plans 4
parking was one of the most common topics, with mixed opinions over how much parking
should be required on a property. Some people mentioned that lower parking should be
required near transit. Others asked that attached garages be excluded from the laneway home
floor area calculation.
Other common topics were the size and height of homes and suites, with some commenters
stating that they should be bigger and others concerned about the size and height and potential
impact on views. Some commenters suggested permitting more lot coverage to allow a larger
building footprint. Some commented that the minimum suite size was too small. Others noted
that more above ground living space was desirable.
There were also comments about lot eligibility, with many commenting that duplexes/semidetached homes should be allowed on smaller lots. Others commented that laneway homes
should be allowed on lots without lanes and on duplex lots.
Comments were received in support of stratification. Some people were concerned about the
high cost of housing in the city. There was mixed support for short term rentals, with some
respondents noting that owners should be required to live on site.
Finally there was some support for pre-approved plans to assist with the development process.
Next steps
the feedback received from this final check-in on phase 1a has been considered in conjunction
with the program recommendations and policy objectives, and where feasible, amendments
have been made to the draft program. This feedback will also inform future phases of the
housing choices program.