Meeting 2023 february 8
committee report
to: chair and members date: 2023 january 30
planning and development
committee
from: general manager file: 41500 20
planning and development
subject: housing choices phase la: draft program
purpose: to provide a draft program with respect to laneway homes and suites in semi
detached homes.
Recommendations:
1. That the committee receive the report entitled: housing choices program:
financial analysisfor laneway units and suites in semis (see attachment #1) and
forward it to council for information.
2. That the committee receive the report entitled: laneway homes andsuites in semi
detached homes program recommendations report (see attachment #2 ) and
forward it to council for information.
3. That the committee recommend that council approve the draft program for
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes, as described in section 6.0 and
appendixa and appendix j5, as a basis for public consultation.
Report
1.0 introduction
on 2021 december 06, council adopted home: burnaby's housing and homelessness strategy
(the homestrategy), a ten yearaction plan for housingin bumaby. The home strategyincluded
a priorityactionfor the city to launchan infillhousingprogramto introducemore housingchoices
to burnaby's single and two family neighbourhoods.
Toimplement this action, the city launchedhousingchoices, a multi-year, multi-phased program
to expand 'missing middle' housing in bumaby. Missingmiddle, in this context, refers to housing
types that fit between a single-family home and a mid-rise building in terms of building form.
Examples of these types of housing include duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, sixplexes, cottage
courts, rowhomes, townhomes and low-rise apartments. The term also refers to properties with
accessory units such as flex suites, secondary suites and laneway homes.
7
to: planning and developmentcommittee
from: generalmanager planning and development
re: housingchoicesphase la: draft program
2023january 30. Page 2
the housing choices program is being introduced in phases. The current phase (phase la) is
focusing on introducing laneway homes, and secondary suites insemi-detached homes. Phase lb
will focus on other options for adding three imits to a single-family lot, or four units to a twofamily lot. These may include single-family homes with two suites, triplexes, fourplexes orcottage
courts (agroup ofsmall homes around a shared courtyard). Phase 2 will focus on additional types
ofmissing middle housing such as rowhomes, townhomes and low-rise apartments. Phase 2 will
take place in conjunction with the official conmiunity plan update.
Thisreport provides an update on the progress ofphase la {section 3.0) and summarizesthe results
oftwo key reports, the financial analysis report {section 4.0) and the program recommendations
report {section 5.0). Italso presents the draft program for laneway homes and secondary suites in
semi-detached homes {section 6.0 andappendices a and b). Subject to council approvd, the
draft program will be presented to the public at open houses in the spring to gather additional
feedback before the program is brought backto council forfinal approval.
2.0 policy context
the housing choices program generally aligns with the following council adopted plans, reports
and policies: corporate strategic plan (2022), official community plan (1998), home:
burnaby's housing andhomelessness strategy (2021), burnaby's housing needs report (2021),
andthemayor'stask forceoncommunity housing finalreport (2019).
3.0 progress update
on2022 february 14, council approved a process for phase la ofthe housing choices program,
to introduce laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes. The tasks from this process are
shown inappendix c, along with columns showing the current status and anticipated schedule to
complete this work.
4.0 financial analysis report
in april 2022, atthe request ofcouncil, the city retained a consultant to undertake a financial
analysis for phase la, to determine the impact that laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes might have onproperty values insingle and two-family neighbourhoods.
Inthe report entitled "housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and
suites in semis" ("financial analysis report"), the key findings from thisanalysis are as
follows:
rental laneway homes
allowing rental laneway homes is unlikely to have any material impact on the value of
single family lots, as the laneway unit value will be largely offset by the cost of creating
the new unit.
Market rents are likely required inorder to make laneway home development financially
attractiveto most homeownersand builders. Lanewayhome development is unlikelyto be
viable ifrents are requiredto be set below market rent.
8
to: planning and development committee
from: general manager planning and development
re: housing choices phase la: draft program
2023january 30. Page 3
rental laneway homes do not have the financial ability to support any significant
contributions toward community amenities.
Suites in semi-detached homes
allowing rental suites in semi-detached homes will create a potential income stream that
prospective purchasers can use to help them finance a portion of the purchase price. This
will likely help some prospective purchasers who would not currently be able to afford a
semi-detached home.
Allowing rental suites in semi-detached homes will notlead to any significant increase in
semi-detached homes sales prices or increased lot values, as the value created bythe rental
suite will be offset by any reduction in the living area available to the unit owner and the
cost to create the rental suite.
The consultant was also asked to consider the impact on property values iflaneway homes were
stratified, andsold separately fi-om the main house. Key findings from this analysis were:
stratified laneway homes
strata laneway homes would bevery profitable andattractive from a financial perspective.
If permitted, it is expected thatthere would be interest from homeowners and builders in
this option.
Allowing stratalaneway homes would likely create significant upward pressure on single
family lot values, unless the city:
requires a significant amenity contribution as part of the approval for a strata
laneway home. However, the supportable contribution would vary widely
depending on the sizeof theunitandthe location of the property. In addition, many
single family homeowners may not be able to provide a significant amenity
contribution until after the strata laneway home is built and sold which would create
an obstacle to creating new homes.
Requires thenew laneway home tobesold ata below market price. The supportable
price discount would vary depending on the size of the laneway home and the
location of theproperty. This approach would require the creation of anaffordable
homeownership program aswell as ongoing administration andmonitoring bycity
staff. In addition, it would be difficult to determine "market price" if all strata
lanewayhomes are requiredto be sold at below market prices.
Stratification of laneway homes is not being considered for phase la of the housing choices
program. However, itcould beconsidered infuture phases, inconjunction with anaffordable home
ownership program. This would support strategy #6 of bumaby's housing and homelessness
strategy to ''explore ways to make home ownership more attainable'.
Acopy ofthe financial analysis report, providing details onthe methodology and findings from
this work, is qs attachment #1.
9
to: planning and development committee
from: general manager planning and development
re: housingchoicesphase la: draft program
2023january 30. Page 4
5.0 program recommendations report
the report entitled ''laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes program
recommendations report ("program recommendations report") provides 108
recommendations and 10 future considerations for the regulation of laneway homes and suitesin
semi-detached homes. Recommendations address a range offactors, including:
zoning and lot eligibility;
building size, height and siting;
parking;
environmental design;
outdoor spaces;
servicing and utilities; and
the application process.
The program recommendations report reflects the results ofabest practicesreview, planning and
policy review, financial analysis, and technical design and modelling, together with feedback
gathered from a survey and workshops undertaken with residents, small housing developers and
other housing industry professionals.
The key themes that emerged throughout this process, and that have been used as principles to
guide the program recommendations are asfollows:
flexibility- no one approach fits all;
optimization - make the bestuse ofspace andresources;
suitability - diverse needs require diverse solutions; and
expediency - make the development process easy and keep itsimple.
Asdiscussed insection 6.0below, theprogram recommendations report was a keyinput into the
developmentofthe proposed draft program.
The program recommendations report is provided asattachment #2.
6.0 draft program
during the fall, the program recommendations report was reviewed by stafffrom across the city,
whose feedback has been used to develop the draft program. The draft program generally reflects
the program recommendations and isdesigned to ensure that itwill meet the needs expressed by
the community while supporting good design practices and achieving the city's long-term
planning objectives.
A summary of the draft program is shown in table 1 and table 2. Additional information is
provided inappendixaandappendix b, further details and rationale isprovided inthe program
recommendations report in attachment #2.
10
to: planning and developmentcommittee
from: generalmanager planning and development
re: housingchoicesphase la: draft program
2023 january 30. Poge5
the proposals for the program are still in draft form. Ifapproved by council they will be presented
to the public at open houses in early spring 2023. Feedback received will be used to develop afinal
program tobebrought back tocouncil for approval.
Table 1: summary of draft program for laneway homes
program eleinent lanewayhomes
zoning districts all zoning districts that permit single-family homes. '
eligible properties properties with a single-family home and vehicular access to the rear yard
from the sideor rearof the property, via an openlaneor residential street.
Subject to streamside protection and enhancement area regulations, traffic
safety review, and other requirements.
Maximum dwelling
units per property
3 (single family home with secondary suite and laneway home).
Ownership single title for the property.
Maximum floor
area
the lesser of:
20% oflot area (0.2 far); and
140m^ (1,506.95 sq. Ft. ).
Subject to meeting otherregulations suchassetbacks and lot coverage.
Minimum floor
area
30 m^ (322.93 sq. Ft. )
maximum height two storeys and
no higherthanthe lowerof:
o 7.6 m(24.93 ft. ) for a sloping roofor 6.7 m(21.98 ft. ) for a flat roof;
and
o the highest pointof the principal dwelling.
Cellars and basements will be permitted and will count as one storey.
Setbacks 1.2m (3.94 ft. ) minimumfrom lane
2.4 m (7.87 ft. ) minimum from house
side setbacks asperexisting zoning bylaw regulations for the main
dwelling.
Lot coverage 45% maximum for buildings/structures
70% maximum for impervious surfaces
minimum number
of parking stalls for
the whole property
1 van accessible parking pad or carport space.
(1 space for up to 3 units)
environmental
design
step code level 3
outdoor space 2 trees per site (or as per burnaby tree bylaw which isanticipated to be
updated later in 2023).
Private outdoor space for the laneway home will beencouraged: minimum
4m^ (43.06 sq. Ft. ) private patio or minimum 3m^ (32.29 sq. Ft. ) deck or
balcony.
'see appendixaregarding al, a2 and a3 zoning districts.
11
to: planning and development committee
from: general manager planning anddevelopment
re: housing choices phase ia: draft program
2023 january 30. Page 6
program element : laiiew^; homes
access/addressing a clear unobstructed pedestrian access path from the street will be required:
minimum 0.91m (3 ft. ) wide and clear to sky.
L suffix will be added to the main address to identify laneway home (e. G.
Li-5044 main street).
Servicing and
utilities
separate sewer, water and power.
Supplementaryutility charges (being the rental suite in a singlefamily
dwelling- supplementary utility fee in the bumaby consolidated fees
and charges bylaw).
Supplementary utility charges will be charged regardless ofwhether the
laneway home is rented or not. Fees are subject to further analysis and
consultation.
No additional garbage receptacle required.
Application process building permit
this approach is subject to change pending results from the development
approvals process (dap) project.
Heritage exceptions to these regulationsmay be considered to preserve heritage
buildings, through the heritage revitalisation agreement process.
Table 2: summary of draft program for secondary suites in semi-detached homes
program element suiteis^ semi-detached homes
zoning districts all zoning districts that permit two-family homes.
Eligible properties propertiesv^th a two-familysemi-detached home and vehicularaccess to the
rear yard from the side or rear ofthe property, via an open lane or residential
street.
Maximum
dwelling units per
property
4 (two semi-detached units, each with one secondary suite per unit).
Ownership suite may not be separately strata-titled jfrom the semi-detached unit.
Maximum floor
area
no maximum floor area for the secondary suite but it must be contained
within the semi-detached unit.
A secondary suite located in a cellar or in a fully accessible basementmay be
added to a semi-detached home and will not count as floor area. Floor area of
cellar secondary suites and fully accessible basement secondary suites must
be no greater than the floor area ofthe main storey.
Minimum floor
area
30 m^ (322.93 sq. Ft. )
maximum height two storeys and
9.0 m (29.5 ft. ) for a sloping roof or 7.4 m (24.3 ft. ) for a flat roof; or
for a semi-detached home with a fully-accessible basement secondary
suite: 10.5m (34.4 ft) for a sloping roof, or 8.9m (29,2 ft. ) for a flat roof.
Cellars and fully accessible basements constructed as secondary suites will be
permitted and will not count as a storey.
Setbacks setbacks for semi-detached homes will be as per existing zoning bylaw
regulations.
12
to: planning and developmentcommittee
from: general manager planning and development
re: housingchoices phase la: draftprogram
2023 january30. 7
prograin element suites in semi-detached homes:
lot coverage 45% maximum for buildings/structures.
70% maximum for impervious surfaces.
Minimum number
of parking stalls
for the whole
property
2 accessible parking pads or carport spaces.
(2 spaces for up to 4 units)
environmental
design
step code level 3
outdoor space as per burnabytree bylaw
private outdoor space for each suite will be encouraged: minimum 4m^
(43.06 sq. Ft. ).
Access/addressing s suffixes will be added to the main address to identify secondary suites, (e. G.
Si- 5049 main street).
Servicing and
utilities
servicing as persecondary suitesin single-family homes.
Supplementary utility charges (being the rental suite ina two family dwelling-supplementary utility fee inthe bumaby consolidated fees and
charges bylaw).
Supplementary utility charges for suites will only becharged ifa suite is
rented out.
Fees are subjectto further analysis and consultation.
No additional garbage receptacle required.
Application
process
building permit
this approach issubject to change pending results from thedevelopment
approvals process (dap) project.
7.0 transportation impacts
the underlying premise for residential ofif-street parking requirements are that residents need
a place to 'store' their vehicle(s) on their property. The regulation of parking for vehicles
within residential properties isregulated by the bumaby zoningbylaw schedule no. Vi11 offstreet parking. Itisstandard toprovide parking on the property tomeet most demands and to
minimize spill-over onto the public streets. Providing more compact housing forms and
multiple units ona single site will generate more parking demands on-site. There are concerns
from the engineering perspective that the reduced parking provisions as presented inthe draft
program {appendices a and b) will increase pressure for on-street parking where there is
currently inadequate supply inmany neighbourhoods. The proposed programrecommendation
will reduce the current bylaw parking requirements on-site byapproximately 60%.
The demand for parking, which can change over time, is affected by a number of factors
including proximity to transit, cycling infrastructure, and other alternative modes available
including carshare vehicles. However, without the technical review of actual vehicle
ownership, on-street utilization and market conditions, there is minimal data to support the
parking rationale in the draft program. As part ofthe city's transportation goals and the
climateaction framework, residents are encouraged to usemore sustainable modes; however,
they will continue to rely on the automobile (i. E. Electric vehicles) in some capacity for the
13
to: planning and development committee
from: general manager planning and development
re: housingchoicesphase la: draft program
2023 january30. Page8
foreseeable future. Therefore, limiting parking supply on-site will impact the neighbourhood
balance for on-street parking.
Areview of comparable municipal parking bylaw rates (refer toappendix d) inthe lower
mainland including city of north vancouver, new westminster, richmond, coquitlam,
surrey, and vancouver confirmsthe number ofparking spaces required per unit varies between
1and 3, with the exception ofvancouver which allows for 1space for up to3units (0.33 spaces
per unit, for single detached houses with both a secondary suite and laneway house).
8.0 next steps
subject to council approval, the draft program will be shared with the public through the city
website and ata series ofopen houses to be held in spring 2023. Asurvey will also be distributed
tocollect feedback from the public. All ofthe open house materials, including the survey, will also
be available online. Feedback will be used to refine the draft program and to prepare a final
program forcouncil consideration andadoption.
9.0 recommendations
this report provides an update on the housing choices program, presents the financialanalysis
report and the program recommendations report, and presents the draft program for laneway
homes and suites in semi-detached homes.
It isrecommended thatthecommittee request that council approve thedraft program, outlined in
section 6.0, appendixa, and appendix bofthis report, as the basis for public consultation to be
held in early spring 2023. It is also recommended that the committee receive the financid
analysis report and program recommendations report, and forward them to council for their
information.
E. W. K
pl
sc/lf/kh: sa
attachments
general manager
and development
copiedto: chiefadministrative officer
deputy chiefadministrative officer and chieffinancial officer
general manager engineering
chiefbuilding inspector
city solicitor
director legislative services
r: \long range clerical\docs\sc\committec reports\2023\housing choices phase 1a-draft program (2023.02.08). Docx
14
appendix a
draft program for laneway homes
the table below describes the draft program for laneway homes. It includes the following topics:
1. Zoning districts
2. Eligible properties
3. Maximum dwelling units per property
4. Tenure
5. Floor area
6. Height
7. Setbacks
8. Lot coverage
9. Parking
10. Environmental design
11. Outdoor space
12. Access/addressing
13. Servicing and utilities
14. Application process
15. Heritage
16. Additional program elements
topic draft program additional information
1. Zoning
districts
laneway homes will be permitted
on eligible properties in all
zoning districts that permit single
family dwellings.
This includes the rl, r2, r3, r4,
r5, r6, r8, r9, rio, rl 1, r12,
rml, rm2, rm3, rm6, al, a2
and a3 zoning districts.
Zone districts al, a2 and a3 are
agricultural zoning districts. Laneway
home regulations in these zones are being
considered separately as part of an
agricultural lands review, which will
examine provincial regulations for
laneway homes on agricultural properties.
This report will be brought to this
committee in spring 2023.
2. Eligible
properties
properties must have:
a single family home; and.
Vehicular access to the
laneway home from the side
or rear of the property, via an
open lane or residential street.
Properties must be able to provide direct
vehicular access to the laneway home from
the side or rear of the property. If this
access is trom a residential street (for
example, on comer or double frontage lots)
it will be subject to approval from the
engineering department to ensure that the
driveway meets traffic safety standards.
Properties containing a stream or
located adjacent to a stream must
comply with the streamside
protection and enhancement
area regulations under the
zoning bylaw, which may limit
the laneway home potential of
those properties.
Properties within 30 metres of the top of
bank of a stream or ravine are subject to
the streamside protection and
enhancement area regulations under the
zoning bylaw. If all or a portion of the
rear yard of the property is located within a
streamside protection and enhancement
area, then this could limit the ability to
construct a laneway home.
15
appendix a - draft program for laneway homes
page 2
topic draft program additional information
laneway homes must be located
in the rear yard of a property.
There will be no minimum lot area for
eligible properties. However, properties
will need to have enough room in the rear
yard to meet bylaw requirements for
setbacks, lot coverage, tree provision and
parking provision in order to build a
laneway home.
3. Maximum
dwelling units
per property
single-family properties may
include a principal dwelling with
a secondary suite, and a laneway
home, for a total of three units.
Secondary suites will not have to be
removed in order to add a laneway home
to a property. This will ensure that existing
tenants aren't impacted by the addition of a
laneway home.
4. Tenure a property with a laneway home
must remain under a single title.
This means that the laneway
home cannot be stratified or
subdivided and sold separately
from the main house.
Stratification may be considered in later
phases of the housing choices program, in
conjunction with additional financial
analysis to support an attainable home
ownership program.
A laneway home may be used by
the owner and their family/guests
or rented out as a long term rental
unit.
In order to protect the long term rental
stock in bumaby, laneway homes will not
be permitted as short term rentals.
The owner will not be required to
live on the property. However, if
the owner lives off-site, they will
be required to apply for an annual
home rental business license.
This is the city's current practice for house
rental businesses where a single family
dwelling is rented or offered for rent, and
is not occupied by the owner. The purpose
of this license is to obtain the contact
information for the owner or their
designate so that they may be contacted in
the event that there are any issues with the
property.
Owners will only be required to apply for
one home rental business license per
property.
5. Floor area maximum floor area for a
laneway home:
the maximum floor area for a
laneway home will be the lesser
of:
20% of the lot area; or
140 m^ (1,506.95 sq. Ft. ).
The maximum floor area for a
laneway home will be calculated
separately from, and unaffected
by, the size of the principal
dwelling.
20% of lot area is equivalent to &floor
area ratio of 0.2. This means that a 4,000
square foot lot could have a laneway home
of up to 800 square feet, and a 6,000
square foot lot could have a laneway home
of up to 1,200 square feet. However, in no
event may a laneway home be more than
1,506 square feet regardless of the lot size.
Many properties will not be able to achieve
the maximum floor area due to other
restrictions such as lot coverage, setbacks
and maximum height.
16
appendix a - draft program for lancway homes
page 3
topic draft program additional information
minimum floor area for a
laneway home:
the minimum floor area for all
laneway homes, regardless of the
size of the lot, will be 30 m^
(322.93 sq. Ft. ).
The minimum floor area (323 square feet)
reflects bumaby's current minimum unit
size for a secondary suite. If the city's
minimum unit size for a secondary suite is
changed, minimum laneway home sizes
may be reviewed.
6. Height maximum height for a
laneway home:
no more than 2 storeys; and
no higher than the lower of:
o 7.6 m (24.93 ft. ) for a
sloping roof, or 6.7 m
(21.98 ft. ) for a flat roof;
and
o the height of the principal
dwelling on the property,
provided the principal
dwelling complies with the
maximum height permitted
under the zoning bylaw for
the applicable zoning
district.
The proposed maximum heights are high
enough to permit a two-storey laneway
home without compromising ceiling
height.
Two-storey laneway homes received the
highest level of support in the housing
choices survey (40%) followed by 2.5
storeys (33%). There were 2,319 responses
to this survey question.
An additional 0.5 m (1.64 ft. )
may be permitted to support
passive house, net zero, or bc
energy step code 5 buildings,
provided that the laneway home
must in any event be lower than
the height of the principal
dwelling.
The total height, with permitted additions
must still be lower than the maximum
height for a principal dwelling in the zone
district.
Basements and cellars will be
permitted in laneway homes and
will count as one storey. They
will also count towards the total
floor area.
Crawl spaces will not be
permitted.
Unlike in the principal building of single
family dwellings, it is recommended that
cellars count as one storey when in a
laneway home. This is to prevent 'two
storey with cellar' forms in the smaller
building envelope of a laneway home.
These forms typically have low ceilings on
each level, as the building height of a
laneway home is lower than a single
family home. This would reduce livability
for occupants.
Crawl spaces are not permitted to
encourage at grade construction and to
reduce overall building height for the
laneway home.
17
appendix a - draft program for lancway homes
paged
topic draft program additional information
7. Setbacks side yard setbacks: a laneway
home will be required to have the
same side yard setbacks that are
set out for a principal building in
the zoning bylaw.
Rear setback: the laneway
home should be set back a
minimum of 1.2 m (3.94 ft. ) from
the rear property line. This is
subject to any additional
requirements for lane
intersections, as specified in the
zoning bylaw.
Separation from the principal
dwelling: there should be at
least 2.4m (7.87 ft. ) between a
laneway home and the main
house.
These building setbacks are based on bc
building code requirements. They are put
in place to provide adequate light and
space between buildings, reduce impacts
on neighbouring properties, and to meet
fire and safety standards.
8. Lot coverage lot coverage:
the laneway home, main house
and any other structures may not
cover more than 45% of the lot
area.
Impervious surfaces:
no more than 70% of the lot area
may be covered by impervious
surfaces (e. G. Buildings,
hardscaped patios and pathways).
Lot coverage and impervious surface
restrictions are put in place to support
stormwater drainage, and prevent
downstream drain overflows and flooding.
These maximums reflect the existing
standards that are used in the city's
models for stormwater runoff. These
standards have also been used to model
different laneway home design scenarios
for bumaby lots.
Properties with homes with a large existing
building and/or pavement footprint
(relative to the lot size) may not have
sufficient space remaining to build a
laneway home.
The city is currently reviewing best
practices for stormwater management.
These restrictions may be relaxed in the
future, if runoff can be reduced by
including innovative onsite stormwater
management practices.
18
appendix a - draa program for lancway homes
page 5
9. Parking 1 parking space will be required
on the property. This must be
uncovered or in a carport, and
meet the city standard for a van
accessible parking space
(5.5m (18.04 ft. ) l x 3.4 m (11.15
ft. ) wx 2.3 m (7.55 ft. ) h).
The parking area must include an
energized outlet capable of
providing level 2 charging for an
electric vehicle.
Additional parking spaces may be
provided but will not be required.
These may be uncovered, in a
carport, or in a garage. Existing
detached garages can remain on
the property subject to building
separation requirements. Garages
attached to a laneway home, or
attached to a laneway home
carport, will be counted as
laneway floor area.
This parking requirement is lower than the
city's current standard for off-street
parking.
Current standards would require
homeowners to provide a minimum of 3
off-street parking spaces for properties
with a laneway home and a secondary
suite.
Outdoor parking spaces are recommended,
as studies have shown that interior garages
are often not used for parking. The outdoor
parking space required for a laneway home
will be in addition to any indoor parking
spaces on the property. This means that in
many cases homes with indoor parking
will be providing more than one parking
space.
Van accessible parking is preferred, to
accommodate residents with a wide range
of needs and prevent congestion in the
lane.
This parking requirement is being
recommended for the following reasons:
lower parking requirements support
more flexible design options, and will
make it easier to build one-storey,
fully accessible laneway homes that
are less intrusive to neighbouring
properties.
Lower parking requirements do not
prevent residents from adding more
parking spaces. Having a lower
minimum requirement will give people
flexibility to choose how much
parking to provide on their property,
according to their needs and the
characteristics of their site.
Lower parking requirements reflect the
directions of the bumaby
transportation plan and climate
action framework by discouraging
driving and providing more room for
trees and green space.
19
appendix a - draft program for laneway homes
paged
topic draft program
bike lockers up to 6m^ (64.58
sq. Ft. ) and no higher than 1.2m
(3.94 ft. ) will be excluded from
floor area calculations.
Additional information
in the housing choices survey,
conducted in spring 2022, over two
thirds of respondents indicated that
they would support lower parking
requirements. (total respondents;
2,320).
Bumaby is well served by transit. It
has two skytrain lines, three rapid bus
routes, and additional higher order
transit planned for the future.
Currently, 98% of single and two
family properties are located within a
10 minute walk of a transit stop or a
skytrain station.
Bike lockers provide a secure location for
storing bikes and electric bikes.
10. Environmental
design
laneway homes must be built to
a minimum of step 3 of the
energy step code.
This requirement is based on anticipated
revisions to part 9 of the bc building
code, which regulates residential buildings
with 3 storeys or less, having a building
area not exceeding 600 m^, including
laneway homes.
Anticipated revisions to the bc building
code in 2023 will support different
pathways for energy modeling and air
tightness testing, as well as for carbon
emissions. The additional pathways are in
part to support different sizes of part 9
homes, which would include laneway
homes. The additional pathways aim to
mitigate the difficulty for smaller homes,
like laneway homes, to meet the current
step code, carbon emission and air
tightness testing requirements.
20
appendix a - draft program for laneway homes
page?
Topic draft program additiohal information
11. Outdoor space it is proposed that a minimum of
two trees be required on the
property. This proposal is subject
to the results of the upcoming
review of the bumaby tree
bylaw.
The urban forest is of key importance to
climate action and adaptation to hotter
summers and wetter winters. Although it
may be necessary to remove some trees to
support laneway home development, the
city's goal is to have no net loss of trees
and, if possible, net gain via replacement
tree planting. Staff are currently reviewing
the bumaby tree bylaw with a climate
action/adaptation lens and finalizing the
urban forest management strategy. It is
anticipated that this work will be complete
before the implementation of the laneway
homes program, and will be used to guide
tree requirements for laneway home
development.
An outdoor patio with minimum
area of 4 m^ (43.06 sq. Ft. ) or
deck/balcony minimum 3 m^;
(32.29 sq. Ft. ) will be encouraged
to provide open space for
occupants of the laneway home.
A design guide to planning outdoor spaces
will be provided as part of the program
implementation. Plans should consider
privacy and overlook to neighbouring
properties. Non-invasive and droughtresistant plants will be encouraged.
12. Access/
addressing
a clear unobstructed pedestrian
access path from the street will be
required, with a minimum width
of 0.91 m (3 ft. ) and clear to sky.
This is to provide safe pedestrian access to
the laneway home for emergency services.
The laneway home address
number must be clearly visible
from the street.
Each property will continue to have one
legal address. Laneway homes and suites
will be allocated the suffixes l and s in the
city's property databases, (e. G. Li-2600
port street). For city-wide mail-outs,
separate notices will be sent to laneway
homes and suites.
Additional guidelines for access and
addressing, such as the location of address
numbers, entrances and mailboxes, will be
provided in a design guide for the
program.
Accessibility features such as
stairlifts and ground-floor
bathrooms will be encouraged.
These will be encouraged through a floor
area exclusion in support of stairlifts and a
design guide that will accompany the
program.
13. Servicing and
utilities
separate sewer, water and power
servicing will be required.
Separate services have been recommended
to ensure that laneway home tenants are
not dependent on the principal dwelling to
access their services. This approach would
also support stratification if this is
introduced in the future.
21
appendin a - draft program for lancway homes
pages
topic draft program additional information
the city will charge an annual
supplementary utility fee for
providing water and sewer
services to a laneway home
regardless of whether it is rented
or not.
Supplementary utility fees are updated
annually and published on the city
website.
It is proposed that the fee for a laneway
home will be set to the same rate as the fee
for a rental suite in a single family
dwelling - supplementary utility fee in
the bumaby consolidated fees and
charges bylaw.
This fee will apply to laneway homes,
regardless of whether it is rented to a
tenant or not.
Fees are subject to further analysis and
consultation.
There will be no additional
garbage disposal fee unless a
larger receptacle is requested.
If there are two dwelling units on
the property (house and laneway
home, or house and secondary
suite) a maximum of one garbage
receptacle (up to 360l) will be
permitted.
If there are three dwelling units
on the property (house and
secondary suite and laneway
home), a larger receptacle (up to
360l) can be requested. If, after
upsizing to 360l, this is
insufficient, a second small
(120l) receptacle will also be
permitted.
The city's goal is to support waste
reduction and diversion, so a larger
garbage receptacle is not required for
properties with a laneway home, but can
be requested.
For efficiency, it is preferred that there is
only one garbage receptacle per property.
There is no limit to the number of
recycling bins that can be picked up.
A dedicated area for storing
garbage and recycling bins will
be encouraged.
Guidelines for the size and location of this
area will be provided in a design guide that
will accompany the program.
22
appendix a - draft program for laneway homes
topic draft program additional information
14. Application
process
construction of a laneway home
will require a building permit.
The application process will be similar to
building a single family home.
Applications with variance requests may
take additional time to process.
This approach is subject to change pending
results from the development approvals
process (dap) project.
A design guide will be developed to assist
with the application process. This will
include information on site planning to
support neighbourly, accessible and
sustainable designs.
15. Heritage exceptions to these regulations
will be considered to preserve
heritage buildings, through the
heritage revitalization
agreement process.
Measures considered may include:
siting relaxations
allowing construction of laneway
homes on properties without lane or
street access.
16. Additional
program
elements
other design considerations given
in the program recommendations
report (attachment #2), such as
placement of windows and decks,
landscaping and entranceways)
may also be included in the
program.
These design considerations do not require
bylaw amendments but will be encouraged
through a design guide that will
accompany the program.
Additional program elements that the city
will explore in the years following
program activation include;
setting up a portal to store and share
preapproved designs that meet or
exceed the city's policies and best
practices.
Opportunities to support
improvements to the lane (e. G. To make
it safer, more accessible and pedestrian
friendly).
The viability of implementing a
laneway naming program to contribute
to the identity and character of lanes.
23
appendix b
draft program for secondary suites in semi-detached homes
the table below describes the draft program for secondary suites in semi-detached homes. This includes:
1. Zoning districts
2. Eligible properties
3. Maximum dwelling units per property
4. Tenure
5. Floor area
6. Height
7. Setbacks and lot coverage
8. Parking
9. Environmental design
10. Outdoor space
11. Access/addressing
12. Servicing and utilities
13. Application process
14. Additional program elements
topic draft program additional information
1. Zoning
districts
secondary suites in semi-detached
homes will be permitted on eligible
properties in all zoning districts that
permit two-family dwellings.
This includes the r4, r5, r6, r8,
r12 and rm6 zoning districts.
Secondary suites will be permitted in
semi-detached homes where the units are
placed side-by-side, or front-to-back on
a lot.
As per the bc building code, suites will
not be permitted in up/down duplexes,
where dwelling units are above or below
other dwelling units, due to fire
separation requirements.
2. Eiigible
properties
eligible properties must have:
a semi-detached home; and
vehicular access to the property
from the side or rear of the
property, via an open lane or
residential street.
Properties must be able to provide direct
vehicular access to the side or rear of the
property. If this access is from a
residential street (for example, on comer
or double fronted properties) it will be
subject to approval fim the engineering
department to ensure the driveway
meets traffic safety standards.
3. Maximum
dwelling
units per
property
properties may include a secondary
suite in each side of the semi
detached home, for a total of four
dwelling units.
4. Tenure secondary suites will be rental
tenure only.
Secondary suites cannot be sold
separately from the semi-detached home.
Secondary suites may be used by
the owner and their family/guests or
rented out as a long-term rental
unit.
Secondary suites cannot be rented out as
short term rentals. This is to help protect
the long-term rental supply.
24
appendix b - draft program for secondary suites in semi-delached homes
page 2
topic draft program additional information
the owner will not be required to
live on the property. However, if
the owner lives off-site, they will be
required to apply for an annual
home rental business license.
The requirement for a home rental
business license reflects the city's
current practice for secondary suites in
single-family homes where the property
owner rents out both the principal
dwelling unit and the secondary suite.
The purpose of this license is to obtain
the contact information for the owner or
their designate so that they may be
contacted in the event that there are any
issues with the property.
Owners will only be required to apply
for one home rental business license per
property.
5. Floor area there will be no restrictions on the
maximum floor area of a secondary
suite, but it must fit within the floor
area permitted for the semi
detached home.
This reflects changes to the bc building
code that were introduced in 2018 to
remove size limits for secondary suites.
This supports the provision of 2 and 3
bedroom secondary suites, which are
currently in short supply in bumaby.
Secondary suites will have a
minimum floor area of 30 m^
(322.93 sq. Ft. ).
This is the city's minimum floor area
requirement for secondary suites.
Floor area minimums are put in place to
maintain livability standards.
Full cellars will be permitted in
two-storey semi-detached homes
with secondary suites. Cellar floor
area will not count towards the
overall floor area calculation. The
floor area of the cellar may not
exceed the floor area of the main
storey.
Fully-accessible basements^ will be
permitted in two-storey semi
detached homes with secondary
suites. They will not count towards
the overall floor area calculation.
The floor area of fully accessible
basements may not exceed the floor
area of the main storey.
Full cellars are currently not permitted in
two-storey semi-detached homes. It is
proposed that full cellars now be
permitted to support the addition of
secondary suites.
Basements differ from cellars in that
they must have over 50% of their height
above grade. There is a preference for
basements over cellars as they generally
provide more light and livability for
tenants. Fully accessible basements are
being encouraged as they will
accommodate people with a wide range
of needs.
' k fully accessible basement means a basement that meets accessibility requirements, as described in the bc
building code. Guidance is provided in the 2020 building accessibility handbook available on w\nv. Bccodes. Ca
25
appendix b - draft program for secondary suites in semi-dctached homes
topic draft program additional information
6. Height maximum height for semi
detached homes with a
secondary suite: two storeys, and
9.0m (29.5 ft. ) for a sloping roof,
or
7.4m (24.3 ft. ) for a flat roof.
This is the same maximum height as
permitted for a single-detached home in
the r4, r5, r6, r8, r12, and rm6
districts. Heights for semi-detached
homes were originally reduced in these
zoning districts to prevent the addition
of secondary suites.
Cellars and fully accessible
basements constructed as a
secondary suite will not count as an
additional storey.
The maximum height for a semi
detached home with a fully
accessible basement suite will be
10.5m (34.4 ft. ) for a sloping roof,
or
8.9m (29.2 ft. ) for a flat roof.
Basements in bumaby typically count as
one storey. To encourage more housing
suitable for a range of mobility needs,
fully accessible basements constructed
as a secondary suite will not count as a
storey and will be permitted a height
relaxation.
7. Setbacks and
lot coverage
as per the zoning bylaw for semi
detached buildings.
Setbacks and lot coverage for newly
constructed semi-detached homes will
not change from existing zoning
regulations.
8. Parking 2 parking spaces will be required
on the property. These must be
uncovered or in a carport, and
meet accessibility standards.
Each parking space must include an
energized outlet capable of
providing level 2 charging for an
electric vehicle.
Additional parking spaces may be
included on the site but they will
not be required. Additional parking
spaces may be located outside or in
garages. Garages will count
towards the maximum total floor
area allowed for the semi-detached
home.
This parking requirement is lower than
the current city standard. Current
standards would require homeowners to
provide a minimum of 4 off-street
parking spaces for properties with a
semi-detached home and two secondary
suites.
Outdoor parking spaces are preferred, as
studies have shown that interior garages
are often not used for parking. The
outdoor parking spaces required for a
semi-detached home with a secondary
suite will be in addition to any indoor
parking spaces on the property. This
means that in many cases homes with
indoor parking will be providing more
than two parking spaces.
Reduced parking requirements for
secondary suites in semi-detached homes
will help to support owners in legalising
existing secondary suites, making them
safer and protecting existing tenants.
Additional rationale for proposing lower
parking minimums are given in
appendix a, section 9).
26
appendix b - draft program for secondary suites in semi-detaehed homes
page 4
topic draft program additional information
9. Environmental
design
bc energy step code 3 for newly
constructed semi-detached homes
with secondary suites.
Semi-detached homes are included in
part 9 of the bc building code. Any
newly constructed semi-detached homes
(with or without suites) will need to meet
step 3 of the bc energy step code. For
additional details on the energy step
code see; www. Energvstedcode. Ca
10. Outdoor
space
an outdoor patio with minimum
area of 4 m^ (43.06 sq. Ft. ) will be
encouraged to provide open space
for occupants of the secondary
guidelines for outdoor space will be
provided in a design guide for the
program.
Suite.
11. Access/
addressing
a clear unobstructed pedestrian
access path from the street will be
required, with a minimum width of
0.91 m (3 ft. ) and clear to sky.
The secondary suite address
number must be clearly visible
from the street.
Secondary suites will be allocated the
suffix "s" in the city's property
databases, (e. G. Si-2600 main street).
For city-wide mail-outs, separate notices
will be sent to each secondary suite.
Additional guidelines for access and
addressing, such as the location of
address numbers, entrances and
mailboxes, will be provided in a design
guide for the program.
12. Utilities the city will charge an annual
supplementary utility fee for
providing water and sewer services
to each rented secondary suite in a
semi-detached home.
Supplementary utility fees are updated
annually and published on the city
website.
It is proposed that the fee for each rented
secondary suite in a semi-detached home
will be the same as the fees for a rental
suite in a two family dwellingsupplementary utility fee in the
bumaby consolidated fees and charges
bylaw.
These fees will only be charged if a
secondary suite is rented out. Owners
will be required to submit a
supplementary utility fees declaration
form to inform the city of the rental
status of their secondary suite(s).
Fees are subject to further analysis and
consultation.
27
appendix b - draft program for secondary suites in scml-detaehed homes
page 5
topic draft program additional information
there will be no additional garbage
disposal fee unless a larger
receptacle is requested.
A maximum of one garbage
receptacle (up to 360l) will be
permitted for each side of the semi
detached home.
The city's goal is to support waste
reduction and diversion, so large garbage
receptacles are not required for semi
detached homes with secondary suites,
but they can be requested.
For efficient solid waste collection, it is
proposed that there be no more than one
garbage receptacle for each side of the
semi-detached home (two in total).
There is no limit to the number of
recycling bins that can be picked up.
13. Application
process
construction of secondary suites
will require a building permit.
The application process to construct a
semi-detached home with secondary
suites, or to add a secondary suite to an
existing semi-detached home, will be
similar to the existing process for suites
in single-family homes. A guide
explaining the building code
requirements will be developed to assist
owners and builders with this process.
This approach is subject to change pending
results from the development approvals
process (dap) project.
14. Additional
program
elements
other design considerations given
in the program recommendations
report {attachment #2), such as
placement of doors and windows,
landscaping and entranceways) may
also be included in the program.
These elements do not require bylaw
amendments but will be encouraged
through a design guide that will
accompany the program.
28
appendix c
housing choices phase la: progress update
task description current status schedule
1. Public
consultation
launch survey to
raise awareness and
collect public input
on key design
elements (e. G. , offstreet parking,
height, size, outdoor
space).
Complete
a housing choices survey was launched
in march 2022 and received 2,550
responses.
Results from this survey were presented
to council on 2022 may 30 and are
available on the housing choices
website, www. Bumaby. Ca/housingchoices
winter
2022
notify and seek
engagement with
local first nations.
Complete
referrals were sent to local first nations
in march 2022. These included the tsleilwaututh nation, squamish nation,
musqueam indian band and kwikwetlem
first nation.
2. Technical
review
undertake technical
reviews to develop
recommendations
for program
elements such as
servicing, building
height and size, offstreet parking and
requirements for
outdoor space.
Complete
a technical review was undertaken in
april, may and june 2022. This included
a best practices review, a planning and
policy review, and design/modelling
analysis of housing forms on bumaby
lots.
Spring
2022
review the financial
implications of
different policy
approaches.
Complete
a consultant was retained in march 2022
to undertake a financial analysis for phase
la.
Results from this analysis are presented in
the financial analysis report (see
section 4.0 and attachment #1 of this
report).
3. Public
consultation #2
host design
workshops to gather
input from the
public, the
development
community, staff,
and other housing
stakeholders.
Complete
the city hosted a series of design
workshops in june 2022. These included
an industry workshop, two virtual public
workshops, an in-person public workshop
and an in-person open house. A summary
of what we heard is available on the
housing choices website.
Spring/
summer
2022
29
appendix c housing choices phase la: progress update
':2
4. Draft program develop draft
regulations and
circulate internally
for review and
input.
Results from tasks 1-3 were used to
develop recommendations for the
program (see section 5.0 and attachment
#2 of this report). These form the basis of
the draft program, presented in section
6.0 of this report.
Fall/
winter
2022/3
**we are here**
5.0cp
amendments
amend the official
community plan
(ocp) to support the
introduction of
laneway homes and
secondary suites in
semi-detached
homes.
An initial report to introduce the ocp
amendments is included as a separate
item on this committee meeting agenda.
This report will be followed by a 60 day
consultation period.
A second ocp amendment report will
provide the results of the ocp
consultation and request a public hearing.
It is anticipated that this will be brought
to this committee in summer 2023.
February
2023
6. Public
consultation
host open houses to
present the draft
program, seek
feedback, and
answer questions.
Subject to council approval, the draft
program will be presented to the public at
open houses in spring 2023.
Dates for these open houses will be
published on the housing choices
website as soon as they have been
confirmed.
Spring
2023
7. Final program present the final
program to council.
The draft program will be refined and
updated following public consultation
#3.
The final program will then be presented
to council for approval.
Spring/
summer
2023
8. Bylaw
amendments
amend the zoning
bylaw and other
city bylaws, as
needed, to support
the program.
This work will commence following
council approval of the final program.
It is anticipated that the bylaw
amendments will be brought to the
planning and development committee in
fall 2023.
Summer/
fall 2023
9. Implementation develop
communications
materials and
launch the
development
approvals process.
Communications materials will be
developed to support the program.
Subject to approval of the final program
and associated bylaw amendments, the
development approvals process will be
established in fall 2023.
Fall 2023
30
appendix c - housing choices phase la: progress update
page 3
10. Monitoring monitor progress. Following the program launch, data on
progress and any emerging issues will be
collected to support program monitoring
and review.
Ongoing
31
appendix d
housing choices phase la: comparable municipal off-street parking requirements
municipality type
city ofnorth
vancouver
one-unit use or two-unit
accessory secondarv suite/coach house use
1.0
1.0
city ofrichmond
single detached housing
two-unit housing
coach houses
2.0
2.0
1.0
city ofcoquitlam
one-family residential
duplex residential
secondary suites/accessory one-family
residential/carriage house or garden cottage
2.0
2.0
1.0
city of surrey single family dwelling 3.0
city ofvancouver
single detached house
single detached house with secondary suite
single detached house with secondary suite and
laneway house
1.0
0.5 (1 total)
0.33 (1 total)
city of bumaby
(current)
single family, two family, and row house
single familv with secondary suite
1.0
1.0
32