September 2022
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes
engagement summary report
city of burnaby
housing choices
2
table of contents
executive summary
introduction
1. Community workshop
2. Virtual workshops
3. Other input
4. Next steps
appendix a - community workshop
appendix b - virtual workshops
appendix c - email correspondence
6
10
12
32
40
44
burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 3
the above rendering illustrates a future vision for laneways in burnaby, where diverse housing choices
foster a vibrant public realm and support the community's broader goals. This vision was inspired by
conversations with community members through a variety of engagement activities.
4
burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 5
executive summary
since 2019, the city of burnaby has conducted
extensive public engagement on housing, shedding
light on our community's needs and priorities.
Building on these community conversations, the city
launched an engagement campaign for its housing
choices program that specifically focused on the
planning, design, and implementation of laneway
homes and suites in semi-detached homes. It
included a public online survey, a virtual workshop
targeting industry partners, in-person and virtual public
workshops, and a drop-in public open house.
6
who we reached
over 250 people registered across 4 workshops, with
an estimated additional 100 participants attending
the drop-in open house component of the in-person
workshop. In addition, a total of 2,550 respondents
completed the public housing choices survey. The
engagement process involved conversations with a
diverse group of residents from a wide range of ages,
family structures, and lived experiences.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 7
what we heard -
overall emerging themes
during public engagement, we received a diverse
range of perspectives and insights on the challenges
and opportunities of housing in burnaby. The most
prominent themes we heard from residents were as
follows:
flexibility  no one approach fits all
participants supported a diversity of options for
laneway homes  including number of storeys,
building heights, parking, setbacks, forms, rooflines,
outdoor spaces, landscaping, entrances, and more.
Participants often highlighted the need to respond to
site constraints, including topography, neighbouring
properties, and lot configurations. For both laneway
homes and secondary suites, there was support to
provide some guidelines and regulations to help
achieve city and community priorities, with enough
flexibility to allow for creative solutions and designs
that meet the needs of residents.
Optimization  make the best use of space and resources
participants supported efficient approaches that
considered both maximizing living space and
advancing other community priorities. Potential
solutions included cantilevered designs that provide
floor space above open parking, take advantage of
sloped properties, and use flat roofs as private outdoor
spaces. There was general support for higher building
heights (2-3 storeys), to allow for more open space
particularly on smaller lots, while encouraging larger
one-storey accessible units on larger lots. Participants
highlighted the importance of balancing the provision
of new housing with retaining and restoring green
spaces, as well as ensuring buildings are efficient and
adopt a holistic approach to climate action.
Suitability  diverse needs require diverse solutions
similar to the theme around flexibility, participants
voiced a desire to have specific solutions for their
unique needs for both laneway homes and secondary
suites. For example, multi-generational homes
may have different considerations for privacy and
shared outdoor spaces, including approaches to
the placement of windows and setbacks between
units. Another example is the suitability of spaces to
meet peoples unique accessibility needs, in which
(for example) the bedroom and kitchen could all be
located on the same floor and accessed at grade with
a no-step entrance.
Expediency  make the development process
easy and keep it simple
participants shared a sense of urgency to ensure
more diverse housing options are implemented in
burnaby as soon as possible. Participants would like to
see a streamlined approvals process  such as preapproved designs and reduced development process
requirements  in order to increase certainty, improve
efficiency, and decrease the likelihood of delays and
rising costs.
8
burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 9
engagement objectives
the overarching objectives for this engagement were
to:
 launch the housing choices engagement process;
 refine the specific program recommendations
for laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes to be presented to council; and
 establish a foundation for future phases of the
housing choices program.
Phase 1a of the housing choices program will introduce laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes
across burnaby. This will be followed by more dense forms of missing middle housing in phases 1b and 2.
Introduction
phase 1a phase 1b
laneway homes and suites
in semi-detached homes
homes with two suites and
fourplexes
to foster a shared understanding for the future of
infill housing in burnaby, this process gathered input
from residents, the development industry, and other
stakeholders to develop program recommendations.
The engagement process was designed in a way that
acknowledges that: people deserve to be part of the
planning processes that affect their lives; people are
experts in their own lived experiences and therefore
have inherent expertise to share; and peoples input
strengthens the plan and planning process.
10
engagement activities
the design and planning of engagement activities
were informed by outcomes from the housing choices
public survey on preferences related to laneway
homes and suites in semi-detached homes, research
on best practices from other municipalities, and
engagement with various city of burnaby departments.
To support diverse forms of participation, both inperson and virtual workshops were facilitated, with 3
workshops open to the general public and 1 workshop
hosted specifically with members of the development
industry.
Phase 2 mid-rise buildings
full range of missing middle
housing
"missing middle housing" provides
multiple units on the same lot, either
clustered, stacked, in a row, or in a
single building. The scale of missing
middle housing is smaller than mid-rise
or high-rise apartment developments,
and is compatible with single family
neighbourhoods. Examples of missing
middle housing may include duplexes,
triplexes, fourplexes, sixplexes, courtyard
clusters, rowhomes, and low-rise
apartments, and accessory units such as
flex suites, secondary suites and laneway
homes.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 11
1
community
workshop
community workshop
overview
in-person community workshop and drop-in public
open house
an in-person community workshop was hosted on
june 22nd, 2022 at the bonsor recreation complex.
A total of 105 participants registered for this event.
This workshop was facilitated using smaller group
discussions, with tables of 10 participants offering
input on preliminary design options as well as their
preferences related to example projects. This input
was captured using interactive worksheets, which
prompted participants to share what was working
well, what needed to be improved, and what required
further exploration.
The facilitated portion of the workshop was
complemented by a drop-in open house at the same
venue, where panels offered background information,
a summary of results from the online survey,
preliminary design options, and a selection of project
examples. The general public was encouraged to
provide input on the boards and city of burnaby staff
were available to answer any questions.
14
an example workshop activity sheet, which presented a range of potential design options including key
considerations. Participants reviewed and responded to each design option, noting which elements were working
well, which needed improvement, and what required further exploration.
All completed worksheets from the workshop can be found in appendix a.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 15
what we heard - overall
implementation of the housing choices program
many workshop participants shared either a personal
interest in building a laneway home, or a desire to live
in one in the future. Residents often communicated a
sense of immediacy in wanting to see laneway homes
built in the near future, including through an efficient
approvals process. They offered various strategies
to achieve this, including limiting public consultation
for every project, providing pre-approved designs for
laneway homes, supporting pre-fabricated options, and
reducing the length and complexity of the permitting
process.
Affordability and feasibility
related to program implementation, participants
shared a desire for laneway homes and suites in
semi-detached homes to address affordability. Ideas
that were shared included reduced permitting and
servicing costs, as well as flexible design options
depending on homeowner preference and lot
constraints. Participants also highlighted a desire for
clarity through the approvals process, ensuring welldefined parameters and predictable expectations for
what is permitted..
Future program phases
to ensure an engaged discussion, the workshop
focused on the first phase of the housing choices
program; however, through these conversations,
participants often shared an interest in housing
options beyond laneway homes and secondary suites,
including fourplexes and opportunities to build two
laneway homes, particularly on larger lots.
Simple design approaches
participants often favoured design options and
example projects that were simple in nature, with a
recognition that all options should be allowed if they
meet certain program requirements. Some participants
shared an interest in laneway home design options
that complement existing dwellings, while others
recognized the importance of allowing flexibility and
creativity in the design process.
Livable design
in sharing their input on design options and example
projects, residents often favoured design features
that supported livability, including but not limited to:
access to natural daylight; generous windows; private
green spaces; and high ceiling heights. Residents also
highlighted a broader support for livability, including
multi-generational homes, diverse and inclusive
communities, and social and resilient neighbourhoods.
Accessibility
residents often identified the importance of accessible
options for diverse and aging populations. Participants
particularly valued at grade, no-step entrances, with
a general appreciation for one-storey laneway home
options and above grade suites in semi-detached
homes. Some participants shared concerns about onestorey laneway homes having too large of a footprint
and over-contributing to lot coverage on smaller lots..
Permeability and green space
participants often favoured examples that included
more green space and disliked options that showed
too much paved area. Trees, shrubs, and plantings
were often identified as positive design elements,
and design options that preserved open space and
supported rainwater infiltration were also favoured.
16
the above graphic was created with input from diverse
conversations with residents during the in-person workshop.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 17
what we heard -
laneway homes
flexibility
participants often shared an interest in allowing a
range of design options, depending on the size and
configuration of the lot, and the preferences of the
homeowner. Participants recognized that each option
will likely include trade-offs, with an appreciation for
a variety of diverse configurations. Some residents
shared that there should be different rules for different
lot types, including corner lots where side entrances
and private outdoor spaces may be more appropriate.
Further, multiple participants indicated that one storey
larger footprint laneway homes should be encouraged
on larger lots.
Parking
residents shared mixed responses to the number of
on-site parking spaces being shown within design
options. There was general support to not include
parking ratios, with multiple groups identifying at least
one covered parking space as an appropriate amount,
and multiple comments that design options showing
three parking spaces were too many. There was strong
support for carports and cantilevered designs that
provide covered parking spaces with the opportunity
to use the second floor for living or outdoor space.
Some residents also shared that the number of parking
spaces should depend on proximity to transit, where
areas better served by transit could reduce parking
requirements.
Outdoor space
there were mixed comments related to the siting of
a laneway home's outdoor space. Some identified a
preference for side and rear yard spaces, while others
appreciated options that showed a setback yard facing
the lane. Some shared concern around the impact of
this configuration on the principal dwelling's outdoor
space and privacy. There was strong interest in
utilizing rooftops for private outdoor space. Separation,
privacy, and orientation of open areas were highlighted
as important qualities to consider when planning and
designing these spaces.
The above diagram illustrates one design option
that included a patio set back from the lane.
18
size and form
there was general support for more living space and
design options that maximized the amount of livable
floor area. Examples included cantilevered designs
or options that had larger footprints. There was
general support for options that included a second
storey that was the same size as the first. Some
participants shared a preference for the allowable size
of a laneway home to not be tied to the area of the
existing building. Participants also expressed approval
for allowing laneway homes on heritage home lots
to have additional floor area allowances. Participants
appreciated the character of dormer windows and
sloped roofs, however also recognized that simpler
forms could be more efficient for interior living space.
There was general appreciation for flat roofs for their
ability to provide additional usable outdoor space.
Participants often appreciated examples where the
laneway home looked 'like a home' or had enough
presence to be perceived as a primary residence.
Height
overall, there was general support for laneway homes
with more than one storey. Participants recognized the
importance of understanding neighbourhood context,
with an appreciation for thoughtful and creative design
considerations that mitigate overlook and privacy
concerns. For example, partially below grade first
floors could allow for higher ceiling heights and two
storeys, while limiting the overall impact of the laneway
home. Related, some participants shared a preference
to limit the amount of below grade living space so as
to avoid residents living in spaces with limited natural
light.
In reviewing visual preferences, some participants
shared that three storey options were potentially too
tall, while some participants were concerned about
the height of the laneway home in proportion to
the principal dwelling. Overall, there was a general
preference to preserve open space and maximize
livable area, which may require taller laneway homes.
Setbacks and siting of laneway home
residents shared a wide range of opinions around
minimum setbacks from the laneway, neighbouring
properties, and principal dwelling. Some participants
appreciated maximizing the available living space by
reducing setbacks, while others shared a preference
to not have the laneway home be as wide as the lot
itself. Participants often highlighted the opportunity to
reduce the front yard setback of the principal dwelling
to optimize a site's overall open space. Reduced
setbacks were also viewed as more appropriate in
urban areas with smaller lots, and less appropriate in
less urban areas with larger lots. Many participants
preferred to locate the laneway home along one edge
of the property (particularly on larger lots) to maximize
outdoor green space and reduce the visual impact of
the building. Zero lot line / no setback conditions will
require further analysis of servicing needs and impacts
on neighbouring properties; however, there is general
support at a discretionary level.
Windows
there was some support for options that allow the
placement of windows on all sides of the home, while
others shared concerns around privacy for balconies
and windows facing the lane and neighbouring
properties.
Servicing
some participants shared an interest in the opportunity
to connect services such as water to the main house
to reduce the cost of building a laneway home. There
were questions regarding the placement of waste and
recycling facilities, with a general interest in seeing
dedicated spaces for waste bins. There were also
multiple comments in support for requiring electric
vehicle charging.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 19
storage
there was general support for storage in cellar
and basement spaces as well as for providing bike
storage, with the option to exempt this space from the
allowable floor area.
Landscape design and permeability
there was strong support for green roofs, permeable
pavers, and low maintenance xeriscaping. Many
participants appreciated laneway home concepts
which featured green areas and private outdoor
spaces, but recognized that homeowners should
ultimately decide on the amount and type of
landscaping.. The provision of green space between
laneway homes was viewed as important, as well
as plantings along the lanemany examples were
'loved' for their inclusion of landscaping that softens
this edge. Several participants mentioned including
minimum tree requirementsespecially if any existing
trees are removed through the construction process.
Participants also often liked laneway home examples
that included fencing and screening for privacy.
Presence in the lane
many residents shared a desire for laneway homes
to be designed as welcoming spaces, including
considerations for windows facing the lane, diversity
of forms, and material selection. Through reviewing
example projects, participants often shared a visual
preference for options that do not look like garages,
minimizing the visual presence of space dedicated to
vehicles. Participant also shared an interest in seeing
social spaces facing the laneway to activate the public
realm.
The following pages highlight some of
the representative input received from
the community workshop.
20
these illustrations were created
to visually represent the ideas,
experiences, and preferences of
workshop participants.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 21
participants often loved this example, highlighting the visual
appeal of the laneway home's height and size, the subtle
location of parking, use of natural materials, provision of big
windows and spaciousness of form.
This example was often identified as potentially too tall
and out of character with the main house. Participants also
appreciated the amount of living space that a three-storey
laneway home could provide.
22
this laneway home was often favoured for its visual appeal,
including the site's landscape design, outdoor spaces, and
form. Solar panels were also often identified as a positive
design feature. Some participants disliked the lack of privacy
and noted that this example would likely include a higher
construction cost.
This example was often loved for its efficient use of an
existing slope and many desirable features, such as a
second floor patio, integrated parking, and generous living
space..
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 23
one-storey laneway homes were often appreciated for their
potential to provide accessible housing to diverse residents.
This example was also favoured for its style and inner yard
green space,
laneway home examples above garages were often
disliked for their use of stairs to access the unit, however
some participants appreciated the simplicity of this design
configuration.
24
this laneway home was often favoured by participants for
its balance of privacy and openness, as well as approach to
parking,
this example was often favoured for its compact form and
height, attractive roofline, and potential for accessibility.
Some participants disliked the limited green space and
smaller living space provided.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 25
these examples were often disliked for their garage-like
appearances, with participants noting how the dominance of
the garage door and limited windows can create uninspiring
and potentially uninviting laneway spaces.
26
what we heard - suites in semidetached homes
although many of the themes related to laneway
homes are applicable to suites in semi-detached
homes, some themes emerged related to this specific
form of housing:
access
there was general support for entrances to the
various units to be staggered or in separate locations
where the suite entrance would be in the side or
rear of the home. This would also apply to secondary
suite entrances that step down to a private patio.
Participants recognized that the way suites are
accessed should be informed by design and site
constraints, where each entrance should have their
own identity. Participants described this quality as
cohesive but separate - where a secondary suite
entrance is blended into the design of the semidetached home. There was a general desire for
access to both semi-detached homes and secondary
suites to be identifiable from the street, with highly
visible pathways.
Outdoor space
there was general support to encourage private
outdoor spaces, with input ranging from minimum
outdoor space requirements, to enabling the
homeowner to decide the amount and location of
dedicated outdoor space.
Some participants identified the opportunity for
outdoor space to be designed to offer privacy for
the secondary suite, supporting visual interest and
personal space. Multiple participants suggested ideas
to include an accessible rooftop patio or garden,
where a ground floor or below grade option is not
feasible.
Other considerations
beyond access and outdoor space, participants
shared preferences related to suites, including general
interest in encouraging accessible options wherever
possible, support for spaces that are livable, including
adequate natural light into units, and a general
preference for flexibility for homeowners to provide
solutions that meet their needs.
The above diagram represents some of the suites in semidetached home design options that were used to inform and
inspire discussions in community workshops.
The following pages highlight some of
the representative input received from
the community workshop.
This example was appreciated for its defined side entrance
that is easily visible from the street, cohesive and welcoming
design approach, efficient use of green space, and
accessible pathway.
This example was often valued for it's "home-like"
qualities, including warm and natural materials, interesting
architectural design, generous greenery, as well as
designated front entrances for both units.
28
this example was often disliked for its institutional or
commercial quality, lack of greenery, and partially below
grade unit. Some participants appreciated this example for
its simple, modern, and functional design.
This example was valued for its private patio, simple design,
and blending of the secondary suite with the main dwelling.
Some participants disliked the limited accessibility due to
the staircase entry, as well as limited green space.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 29
this example was often loved for its greenery, dedicated
outdoor space with seating area, and size of windows.
Participants also noted an appreciation for well defined
entrances that blend in with the main building.
This secondary suite was often loved for its dedicated
private, outdoor covered patio, and variety of planters, some
participants noted concerns around the space being shaded
by the above staircase while others shared a preference
for more green space and materials that allow rainwater
infiltration.
30
the above graphic was informed by input from workshop participants, illustrating a semidetached home with dedicated private outdoor spaces for secondary suites.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 31
2
virtual
workshops
virtual workshops
overview
to complement the in-person workshop, 3 virtual
sessions were hosted using zoom and miro, an online
collaboration platform.
Community workshops
two virtual workshops (june 27 and 29, 2022) offered
an opportunity for residents to learn about the housing
choices program, provide input on preliminary design
options, and share their preferences related to various
example projects. A total of 100 participants registered
across the 2 workshops.
Development industry workshop
to ensure that preliminary design options are
implementable and reflective of industry realities,
a workshop for development industry participants
was hosted on june 20th, 2022, which focused on
opportunities and challenges related to designing,
planning, and building housing in the lower mainland.
A total of 50 participants registered for the event,
and offered a range of experience in the areas
of architecture, planning, finance, real estate and
development, and others. Participants shared their
experiences working in burnaby as well as in other
municipalities in the region.
34
the above graphic summarizes some of the input shared by participants during the workshops,
highlighting the role of housing in supporting the community's broader goals.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 35
what we heard - overall
virtual workshops presented the same information,
including design options and example projects, as the
in-person community workshop. The following themes
emerged through input received from the 3 online
workshops:
flexible solutions
participants often shared a desire for flexibility in
designing and planning both laneway homes and
suites in semi-detached homes. This included
considerations for unit sizes, heights, forms, and
configurations. Residents also valued different options
for diverse tenure situations - for example, a shared
property between family members may benefit from
proportionately more shared space. The development
community reinforced that all design options should be
allowed in order to support diverse housing choices
within burnaby.
Diverse lot options
participants often shared a desire for different
regulations for different lot types. There was a general
interest in seeing more units on larger lots, including
more than 1 secondary suite, multiple laneway homes,
larger units, more than 4 units, and semi-detached
housing with laneway homes. In addition, there was
general interest in providing different access points
and orientation for laneway homes on corner lots.
Livable spaces
participants often valued design options and example
projects that demonstrated elements of a livable
space. These included natural features such as
gardens, shrubs, planters, trees, and green roofs,
which all contribute to the outdoor experience of
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes.
Participants also identified with projects that supported
privacy, including plantings, screening, fencing, and
orientation of the laneway home's main facade. Other
important design elements included generous access
to natural daylight, such as skylights and windows
that run along the top of walls, as well as access to
private outdoor spaces, such as balconies, patios, and
green roofs. Some participants shared a preference
for consistency between the various units on a lot,
while others valued the opportunity for creative design
solutions.
Development process
participants often highlighted the importance of
providing a simple development process that ensures
efficient approvals.
36
what we heard -
laneway homes
parking
in both design options and example laneway homes,
participants shared mixed preferences for the
number of parking spaces required on each lot. Many
participants viewed a minimum of 1 parking space as
appropriate. Participants highlighted the potential to
reduce parking requirements if the property is located
close to transit. Participants also noted that larger lots
which can accommodate more parking spaces also
tend to be further from rapid transit stations. There was
a broad understanding that shifting demand in vehicle
ownership (due to car-sharing, emerging mobility
technologies, working from home trends) may reduce
the need for parking in the future. Some participants
were interested in the opportunity of providing parking
spaces in the front of the principal dwelling.
The development community highlighted that many
interior garages are not being used for parking and
should likely count toward the allowable floor area
of the laneway home. Further, there was a general
recognition that parking spaces interior to the laneway
home would likely limit the ability to share between the
homeowner and tenant.
There was broad support for carports, with the
opportunity to use the roof for green space or private
outdoor space, as well as flexibility for additional
storage if not used for parking vehicles.
Form and size
there was general support for cantilevered design
options that allow for both parking and living space,
or additional parking spaces. Many participants were
interested in maximizing interior living spaces with
general support to explore higher building heights
and allow for more flexible configurations. Some
participants identified the need to build larger units
wherever possible, as smaller units tend to be more
feasible on a range of lot sizes and configurations.
One-storey design options on smaller lots were
viewed as potentially bulky, with some hesitation
around laneway homes on smaller lots and taller
laneway homes. Participants appreciated design
options and example projects that utilized existing
slopes where possible, particularly with the opportunity
to access private outdoor space from upper storeys.
Setbacks
some participants shared concerns around zero lot
line setbacks in terms of servicing and potential impact
on neighbouring properties, while also recognizing that
this would maximize the amount of living space for the
laneway home. Some participants shared the idea to
locate 2 zero lot line laneway homes adjacent to each
other, with private outdoor space on the opposing
side yards. This condition of alternating or varying set
backs could contribute to a visually engaging laneway.
Participants often shared that setbacks should be used
for green space, access, or parking.
Height
there was general support for laneway homes with
more than 1 storey, particularly as a cost-effective
way to provide housing. Some participants identified
the significance of views to the north as an important
consideration when designing and planning laneway
homes.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 37
servicing
participants shared an interest in servicing options
that reduced the cost of constructing laneway homes,
such as allowing connections to the principal dwelling.
Participants often identified the importance of planning
for waste management, including dedicated spaces
and thoughtful locations for garbage and recycling
bins.
Accessibility
participants communicated a desire to encourage
accessible design features, such as no step, wide
entrances, living spaces on the main floor (kitchen,
bathroom, bedroom), and accessible paths of entry;
however, there was general support to allow the
homeowner or developer to decide what to provide in
terms of accessibility. Many participants supported the
idea of encouraging accessible, one-storey laneway
homes on larger lots and to explore additional
accessibility considerations such as including a second
bedroom for a care provider.
Addressing and access
there was general interest to explore addressing
from the lane, with the potential opportunity to provide
efficient emergency service access. There was
variable support for accessing the laneway home from
either the lane or side yard, some participants noted
that many lanes are busy with vehicle traffic, in which
case a side yard entrance may be more appropriate,
or pedestrian safety improvements would be needed
in the lane. Participants recognized that orienting the
main entrance and facade of the laneway home toward
the lane could improve neighbourhood character,
improving safety and fostering vibrant public spaces.
Livable design
there was general support for opportunities that
embed livable design options, such as overhangs to
protect residents from rain and sun, ensuring enough
natural light within units, and providing private outdoor
spaces such as balconies or patios.
Outdoor space
similar to other design considerations, there was
general interest in flexible requirements around
outdoor space requirements for laneway homes,
including how much private outdoor space should
be provided and where. There was some support to
locate private outdoor space abutting the lane rather
than shared with the rear or side yard, to balance
living space, privacy, and personal space. This
condition could potentially require additional height
considerations, including impact on views, shadowing,
and overlook.
There was some interest in opportunities to provide
shared garden space between the laneway home and
principal dwelling. There was strong support for green
roofs, which offer the benefit of cooling in the summer,
rainwater infiltration, and usable private outdoor
space. Overall, there was general interest in retaining
natural ecosystems and supporting biodiversity as a
complement to housing people.
38
what we heard - suites in semidetached homes
access
there was general support to ensure that both
semi-detached homes and secondary suites are
accessed with equal status, including a clearly visible
and accessible path from the street or lane. Some
participants highlighted that if the semi-detached
home is located on a busy road, then access to the
secondary suite should be from the rear of the lot.
There was a desire to build units at grade, where the
secondary suite could be accessed without the use of
stairs. This preference was shared in support of both
accessibility as well as livability. Some residents shared
the importance of considering the existing grade of the
lot, where suites should still provide natural daylight in
to the unit and a general preference for opportunities
to include ramped pathways rather than stairs where
the unit is partially below grade.
Outdoor space
participants shared mixed support for requiring
dedicated outdoor spaces for secondary suites. Some
participants shared the idea to locate the building
closer to the fronting street to maximize outdoor space
in the rear of the lot, which could be shared between
units.
Other considerations
there was general interest from some residents to be
able to build a laneway home on lots that feature a
semi-detached home with a suite.
Privacy and safety
example projects were often appreciated for the
privacy they offered through various design features,
such as careful setbacks and orientation, privacy
screening, or fencing. Some participants shared
concerns regarding windows facing neighbouring
yards, with support for the use of windows that run
along the top of walls, offering access to natural
daylight and limiting overlook. Some participants
shared concerns around existing traffic and safety
related to entrances from the lane, with considerations
for future improvements such as lighting and traffic
calming.
Flexible future development
there was general support for exploring opportunities
to ensure flexible development in the future, such
as prefabricated, modular laneway homes that could
be moved to a different lot, if an area is consolidated
or upzoned to greater allowable densities. There
were various comments and questions regarding
the stratification of laneway homes, including how it
would impact housing affordability and future land
development
storage
there was general support for storage in cellar and
basement spaces, as well as support for providing bike
storage and exempting this from the allowable floor
area.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 39
3
other input
photo credit: lanefab.
Online survey
the city hosted an online survey that asked residents
to share their preferences related to laneway homes
and suites in semi-detached homes. There were 2,550
respondents. The outcomes from this survey provided
a foundation for the exploration of design options and
informed the project teams approach to engaging
residents through the various workshops. A summary
of this engagement activity is available for review on
the project website at: burnaby. Ca/housingchoices.
Burnaby housing choices project email
throughout this process, residents were able to
contact the city directly through the burnaby housing
choices project email (housingchoices@burnaby.
Ca). Approximately 120 items of correspondence from
residents were received since the housing choices
program launched in february 2022, which ranged
from preferences related to site coverage, to questions
on timing of program implementation.
A summary of these correspondence can be found in
appendix c.
42
burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 43
4
next steps
photo credit: lanefab.
Next steps
with the plentiful, diverse, and informed input from
residents of burnaby, the development community, and
city of burnaby staff, the housing choices project team
is developing a series of program recommendations
for laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes. These program recommendations will reflect
the ideas, experiences, and preferences that were
shared by participants and will be informed by
additional technical input from the project team, city
staff, and lessons learned from other municipalities.
These recommendations will be used as a foundation
for the city of burnabys zoning bylaw amendments for
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes,
and may inform future phases of the housing choices
program.
46
burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 47