October 2022
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes
program recommendations report
city of burnaby
housing choices
2
table of contents
executive summary
introduction
1. What we heard
2. What we learned
3. What we are trying to achieve
4. How we are going to achieve it
5. Implementation
6. Next steps
7. Future considerations
6
8
10
20
28
36
62
66
70
burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 3
the above rendering illustrates a future vision for laneways in burnaby, where diverse housing
choices foster a vibrant public realm and support the community's broader goals.
4
burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 5
executive summary
the city of burnaby has launched a housing
choices program to introduce new housing options
into the city, bridging the gap between single-family
homes and apartments or condos. The first options
being prioritized are laneway homes and secondary
suites in semi-detached homes.
Since there are many ways in which these two
housing choices can look, function, and be
implemented, a process was undertaken to: gather
public input; collect information from city staff;
undertake a scan of similar programs in other
jurisdictions; and review relevant city policies, plans,
and strategies. This work culminated in a series
of recommendations for the implementation of
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes
in burnaby.
Emerging themes from public and stakeholder
input included the desire for flexibility (recognizing
that no one approach fits all), optimization (making
the best use of space and resources), suitability
(providing diverse solutions for diverse needs), and
expediency (making the development process
easy and simple). Detailed input was also provided
on topics ranging from parking and setbacks, to
landscape design and livability.
City staff from diverse departments also provided
insights on these topics, plus additional realms
such as engineering, servicing, and permitting.
Community and staff input built on previous
city-led community engagement and planning
processes, including home: burnaby's housing and
homelessness strategy, burnaby housing needs
report, mayors task force on community housing,
burnaby transportation plan, climate action
framework, community safety plan, and more.
The resulting recommendations aim to support
goals for housing diversity, accessibility,
transportation choices, climate action, open space
and rainwater management, livability, heritage
and character, privacy and safety, and public life.
To bring these goals to life, the recommendations
provide direction on zoning and lot suitability,
tenure, laneway and public realm, siting, parking,
access and identification, landscaping and
permeability, trees, servicing, waste and recycling,
topography, form, interface with lane/street, privacy
and overlook, lighting, accessibility, and building
size, coverage, height, and performance. Further
recommendations are offered for quick and efficient
implementation.
These recommendations will be used as a
foundation for the city of burnabys zoning bylaw
amendments for laneway homes and suites in
semi-detached homes, and may inform future
phases of the housing choices program.
6
burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 7
introduction
the city of burnaby is introducing new residential
unit types that respond to the growing need
for more housing choices across the city. The
mayors task force on community housing (2019)
identified the need for new housing forms in
local neighbourhoods, while the citys housing
needs report (2021) specifically noted the need
for more missing middle housing options across
burnaby. In response, home: burnabys housing
and homelessness strategy (2021) prioritizes
an infill housing program that begins with the
introduction of laneway homes and suites in semidetached homes in the citys residential (r) district
neighbourhoods.
The housing choices program is intended to
facilitate the development of residential infill that:
is compatible with neighbourhood character; is
livable, safe, and accessible; has adequate outdoor
space; offers privacy for residents and neighbours;
meets storage and parking needs; and supports
a myriad of other city plans/policies with topics
ranging from transportation to climate action. In
order to determine how to best implement this first
phase of the housing choices program, a process
was undertaken to:
phase 1a of the housing choices program will introduce laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes
across burnaby. This will be followed by more dense forms of missing middle housing in phases 1b and 2.
Phase 1a phase 1b
laneway homes and suites in
semi-detached homes
homes with two suites and
fourplexes
8
 gather public input from residents,
the development community and other
stakeholders to understand preferences and
priorities;
 collect information from city staff related
to considerations for planning, design, and
implementation;
 undertake a review of similar programs and
policies in other jurisdictions, in order to glean
insights from applications in other municipalities;
and
 review relevant city policies, plans,
strategies, and bylaws to ensure alignment and
find opportunities to meet diverse goals.
This report synthesizes and summarizes the
outcomes of community and staff engagement, and
scan of pertinent city directions. Taken together,
these elements shaped the recommendations
outlined in this report, which aim to optimize the
effectiveness of introducing laneway homes and
suites in semi-detached suites in neighbourhoods
across burnaby.
Phase 2 mid-rise buildings
full range of "missing middle"
housing types
burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 9
1
what we
heard
10
11
extensive public engagement on housing has been
undertaken in burnaby in recent years, shedding
light on community needs and priorities related to
housing affordability, diversity, tenure, accessibility
supports, partnerships, programs, and more.
The engagement undertaken for this process
specifically focused on the planning, design, and
implementation of laneway homes and suites in
semi-detached homes, and included a public
online survey, a virtual workshop targeting industry
partners, in-person and virtual public workshops,
and a drop-in public open house. This section offers
a snapshot of those activities, and the input themes
that emerged.
What we heard
how we engaged
in-person community workshop and drop-in
public open house
an in-person community workshop was hosted on
june 22nd, 2022 at the bonsor recreation complex.
A total of 105 participants registered for this event.
This workshop was facilitated using smaller group
discussions, with tables of 10 participants offering
input on preliminary design options as well as their
preferences related to precedent projects. This
input was captured using interactive worksheets,
which prompted participants to share what was
working well, what needed to be improved, and
what required further exploration.
The facilitated portion of the workshop was
complemented by a drop-in open house event at
the same venue, where panels offered background
information, a summary of results from the online
survey, and preliminary design options and a
sample of precedent projects. The general public
was encouraged to provide input on the boards and
city of burnaby staff were available to answer any
questions.
12
virtual workshops
to complement the in-person workshop, three
virtual sessions were hosted using zoom and miro,
an online collaboration platform.
Community workshops
similar to that of the in-person workshop, two virtual
workshops (june 27th and 29th, 2022) offered an
opportunity for residents to learn about the housing
choices program, provide input on preliminary
design options, and share their preferences
related to various precedent projects. A total of 100
participants registered across the two workshops.
Development industry workshop
to ensure that preliminary design options were
implementable, a development industry specific
workshop was hosted on june 20th, 2022, which
focused on opportunities and challenges related
to designing, planning, and building housing in the
lower mainland. A total of 50 participants registered
for the event, and offered a range of experience
in the areas of architecture, planning, finance, real
estate and development, and others. Participants
shared their experiences working in burnaby as well
as in other municipalities in the region.
Burnaby housing choices email
throughout this process, residents were able
to contact the city directly through the burnaby
housing choices project email (housingchoices@
burnaby. Ca). Approximately 120 items of
correspondence from residents were received
since the housing choices program was launched
in february 2022, which ranged from preferences
related to site coverage, to questions on timing of
program implementation.
Online survey
the city hosted an online survey that asked
residents to share their preferences related to
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes. There were 2,550 respondents. The
outcomes from this survey provided a foundation
for the exploration of design options and informed
the project teams approach to engaging residents
through the various workshops. A summary of this
engagement activity is available for review on the
project website at: burnaby. Ca/housingchoices.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 13
who we reached
over 250 people registered across the four
workshops, with an estimated additional 100
participants attending the drop-in open house
component of the in-person workshop and 2,550
survey respondents. Although demographic
information was not collected, the engagement
process involved conversations with a diversity
of residents, including renters and homeowners,
ranging in ages, family structures, and lived
experiences.
14
what we heard
overall emerging themes
input was plentiful and diverse, however several
themes emerged across the various engagement
activities. The most prominent themes are as
follows:
flexibility  no one approach fits all.
Participants supported a diversity of options for
laneway homes  including number of storeys,
building heights, parking, setbacks, forms, rooflines,
outdoor spaces, landscaping, entrances, and
more. Participants often highlighted the need to
respond to site constraints, including topography,
neighbouring properties, and lot configurations.
For both laneway homes and secondary suites,
there was support to provide some guidelines and
regulations to help achieve city and community
priorities, with enough flexibility to allow for creative
solutions and designs that meet the needs of
residents.
Optimization  make the best use of space and
resources.
Participants supported efficient approaches that
considered both maximizing living space and
advancing other community priorities. Potential
solutions included cantilevered designs, providing
floor space above open parking, taking advantage
of sloped properties, and using flat roofs as private
outdoor spaces. There was general support for
higher building heights (2-3 storeys), to allow for
more open space particularly on smaller lots, while
encouraging larger one storey accessible units on
larger lots. Participants highlighted the importance
of balancing housing people with retaining and
restoring green spaces, as well as ensuring
buildings are efficient and adopt a holistic approach
to climate action.
Suitability  diverse needs require diverse
solutions.
Similar to the theme around flexibility, participants
voiced a desire to have specific solutions for
their unique needs for both laneway homes and
secondary suites. For example, multi-generational
homes may have different considerations for privacy
and shared outdoor spaces, including approaches
to the placement of windows and setbacks
between units. Another example is the suitability
of spaces to meet peoples unique accessibility
needs, in which (for example) the bedroom and
kitchen could all be located on the same floor and
accessed at grade with a no-step entrance.
Expediency  make the development process
easy and keep it simple.
Participants shared a sense of urgency to ensure
more diverse housing options are implemented in
burnaby as soon as possible. Participants would like
to see a streamlined approvals process  such as
pre-approved designs and reduced development
process requirements  in order to increase
certainty, improve efficiency, and decrease the
likelihood of delays and rising costs.
In addition to the emerging themes shared here, a
detailed community engagement summary will be
provided on the project website.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 15
emerging themes specific to
laneway homes
in addition to these overarching themes, several
more specific themes related to laneway homes
emerged:
parking
 general support for reduced parking
requirements, particularly if close to transit.
 Minimum parking should not be a ratio  at least
one parking space per lot was often viewed as
sufficient.
 Broad understanding that shifting demand in
vehicle ownership (due to carsharing, emerging
mobility technologies, working from home
trends) may reduce the need for parking in the
future.
 General appreciation for carports  ensuring
that this space is used for cars, with additional
opportunities for living space or outdoor space
above.
 Interest in exploring opportunities for parking in
the front of the principal dwelling.
Landscape design
 support for green roofs, permeable pavers, and
low maintenance xeriscaping.
 Appreciation for green spaces and private
outdoor spaces, however homeowners should
have the option to decide the amount and type
of landscaping.
Setbacks
 variable feedback around minimum setbacks
from the laneway, neighbouring properties, and
principal dwelling.
 Zero lot line / no set back will require further
analysis of servicing needs and impacts on
neighbouring properties, however there is
general support at a discretionary level.
The above diagram illustrates one of the many laneway home
design options that were presented through community engagement,
exploring opportunities for reduced setbacks and cantilevered forms.
16
storage
 general support for storage in cellar and
basement spaces.
 General support for providing bike storage and
exempting this from the allowable floor area.
Livable design
 support for opportunities such as overhangs to
protect from rain/sun, ensuring enough natural
light, and providing private outdoor spaces such
as balconies or patios.
Presence in the lane
 desire for laneway homes to be designed as
welcoming spaces, including considerations for
windows facing the lane, diversity of forms, and
material selection.
Privacy and safety
 concerns around windows facing neighbouring
yards with support for the use of clerestory
windows for natural light.
 Balconies are supported, with consideration
given to overlook.
 Participants often supported designs that
include some consideration for privacy through
landscaping or fencing.
 Concerns around existing traffic and safety
related to entrances from the lane, with
considerations for future improvements such as
lighting and traffic calming.
Addressing
 general interest in exploring addressing off the
lane.
Existing neighbourhood context
 laneway homes should consider and
complement their surrounding context,
including the height, form, and materials of the
principal dwelling and neighbouring properties.
Potential exemptions
 interest in exploring different rules for different
lot types, including larger lots or corner lots.
 Interest in stratification of laneway including
potential implications for affordability and future
land development.
Connections to broader city processes
 regarding future phases of the housing choices
program, there was general interest in two
laneway homes on larger lots, prefabricated
laneway homes that could be moved in the
future, and laneway homes on duplex lots.
 Support for provision of additional amenities,
including more parks, with increased densities.
 Recognition that the front setback of a main
dwelling can influence the siting and feasibility
of the laneway home.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 17
emerging themes specific to
suites in semi-detached homes
although many of the themes related to laneway
homes are applicable to suites in semi-detached
homes, some themes emerged related to this
specific form of housing:
 general interest in encouraging accessible
options wherever possible.
 Support for encouraging private outdoor spaces.
 Desire for access to both semi-detached homes
and secondary suites to be identifiable from the
street, with highly visible pathways or entrances
informed by design and site constraints.
 Support for spaces that are livable, including
adequate natural light into units.
 Preference for flexibility for homeowners to
provide solutions that meet their needs.
18
burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 19
2
what we
learned
20
21
existing city plans, policies, and
reports
the following city of burnaby plans and other
documents provide context or direction for the
housing choices program, and/or include goals
that could be further advanced by the effective
rollout of laneway homes and suites in semidetached homes.
Home: burnabys housing and homelessness
strategy (2021)
this action-oriented roadmap for addressing
housing opportunities over the next 10 years has
a vision in which burnaby is a place where people
can find a home, afford a home, and feel at home.
Key areas of local need range from more accessible
housing options to more affordable larger units
suitable for families.
The most relevant goals include: building inclusive,
livable neighbourhoods by increasing housing
choices and supporting housing for diverse needs;
and supporting a renter-friendly community by
protecting and growing rental housing stock.
Informing these goals was extensive community
input from the your voice, your home engagement
process, including a key emergent theme of gently
densifying neighbourhoods to increase supply and
diversity housing types.
Strategy #1 is to increase housing choices, including
new options such as laneway homes and suites in
semi-detached homes, including in lower-scale
neighbourhoods. This strategy addresses the needs
of:
 multi-generation families (including those
sharing their homes with parents, adult children,
or other relatives);
 families that are downsizing;
the city of burnaby is in the good position of being
able to learn what has worked well  and what
has not  from other municipalities that have been
regulating laneway homes and suites in semidetached homes for several years.
At the same time, burnaby is a unique place with
its own policy landscape and distinct opportunities
and constraints. This section summarizes key
considerations shared by diverse city departments
relating to engineering and servicing, urban design
and livability, heritage and character, parking
and transportation, environment and landscape,
accessibility, and zoning, building, permitting, and
fire protection.
Likewise, this section summarizes the citys
pertinent policies, plans, strategies, and bylaws,
recognizing that the introduction of missing middle
housing choices help support a myriad of city goals
and planning imperatives.
What we learned
22
 renters wanting to live in lower density
neighbourhoods;
 first-time homebuyers and homeowners
seeking a mortgage helper, as neighbourhoods
that are designated for single family homes and
duplexes  73% of burnabys land area  are
home to property values that have increased
significantly in recent years and are unattainable
for many households
an action for this strategy is to identify ways to
streamline the approval process for housing
applications.
Burnaby housing needs report (2021)
this report presents data and analysis of housing
issues specific to burnaby, and notes some
important needs that are directly pertinent to
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes. These needs include:
 an additional ~15,000 residential units to keep
up with population growth in the next 10 years,
including ~5,700 rental units;
 a greater diversity of housing stock through
ground-oriented multi-family housing, given that
most of the existing housing stock is apartment
buildings and single detached homes;
 addressing the gap between anticipated rental
need and the number of rental units currently in
development;
 improved affordability for renters, as most
renter households earning the median income
in burnaby experience moderate or extreme
housing unaffordability;
 more 2-bedroom units (1,160) and 3-bedroom
units (2,330) between 2021 and 2025 for families
with children and other families; and
 addressing the secondary market, which
comprises almost two thirds of renter
households, of which two-thirds is estimated to
be unauthorized.
Mayors task force on community housing (2019)
the mayors task force was assembled to urgently
address affordable housing concerns by providing
recommendations to council on innovative policies,
directions, and initiatives to increase the supply,
diversity, and affordability of housing in burnaby.
The task forces recommendations include the
relevant themes of: create livable neighbourhoods
(e. G. Develop a plan for introducing new housing
forms and family-oriented housing in a variety of
neighbourhoods); and support rental housing and
tenants (e. G. Increase the supply of affordable rental
housing). It also identifies a quick start action of
making it easier to build small-scale multiple family
homes in a wider variety of neighbourhoods to
serve renters and homebuyers wanting to live in
modest sized, ground-oriented housing.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 23
connecting burnaby: burnaby transportation
plan (2021)
connecting burnaby is a 30-year plan that will guide
transportation planning and policy decisions in the
city. Relevant to the housing choices program, the
plan integrates land use and transportation, in which
a diverse mix of housing and other uses meet daily
needs.
There is direction to ensure that streets are for
everyone and all modes, and the incorporation
of place-making in the design of transportation
networks, accounting for public and social spaces.
This includes focusing on creating safe and
inclusive streets in part through the application of
universal design principles: accessible, participatory,
comfortable, ecological, multi-sensory, walkable,
and predictable. There is further direction to
provide social spaces in streets for people to enjoy,
contributing to a communitys vibrancy, safety, and
sense of place. These directions are pertinent to
the housing choices program as they account for
access, as well as the relationships between infill
housing and the adjacent public realm (including
potentially laneways).
Climate action framework (2020)
the city of burnabys climate action framework
responds to the climate emergency through
adoption of carbon reduction targets and seven
big moves. The resilient neighbourhoods big
move envisions medium-density development
being strategically added to single and two-family
neighbourhoods in order to increase compact
growth and the efficient use of land for housing,
supporting transportation shifts away from cardependency as well as alignment with net zero
carbon buildings (big move 6). Identified co-benefits
include householder diversity, housing affordability,
public health and equity, and climate adaptation
through clean and cool indoor air, and stormwater
mitigation.
Community safety plan (2020)
this high-level strategic safety plan aims to
enhance community safety and well-being.
Directions that are relevant to this first phase of
the housing choices program include support for
many of the housing improvements identified in the
plans above, ranging from increased rental housing
and aging in place. Other relevant directions
include: more developments that apply safety
measures that focus on built form and public realm;
increased responsiveness of emergency services
(e. G. Improved call response times); and safe street
design (i. E. Also covered in burnabys transportation
plan).
Environmental sustainability strategy (2016)
this strategy encompasses many of the topics
covered in more recent plans such as connecting
burnaby and climate action framework. However
it also focuses on other goals such as healthy and
resilient watersheds, in which rainwater restores
and mimics natural flows and quality. This involves
strategies such as encouraging on-site rainwater
management and reducing the volume and
quality of water flowing off impermeable surfaces
through systems like rain gardens and permeable
pavement.
Social sustainability strategy (2011)
while older than the more recently adopted
housing-oriented reports and plans, this strategy
contains directions that nonetheless support
affordable and suitable housing. Other directions
that are relevant to the housing choices program
include promotion of adaptable housing for people
with different abilities, and providing opportunities
for the protection of privately owned heritage
resources.
24
official community plan (adopted 1998; updated
2014)
burnabys official community plan (ocp) provides
a long-term vision for managing the citys growth,
and is currently being reviewed. The current
ocp envisions a more complete community, an
environmentally aware community, a community of
economic opportunity, a community with increased
transportation choice, an involved community, and a
community within a livable region.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 25
city department sessions
as part of this engagement process, the project
team hosted a series of internal workshops with
diverse city departments to discuss potential
challenges and opportunities related to laneway
homes and suites in semi-detached homes in
burnaby. The majority of input received was related
to laneway homes and the summary of workshop
outcomes below reflects this.
Engineering and servicing
 the citys existing infrastructure capacity is
generally able to accommodate additional infill
opportunities, including laneway homes and
suites in semi-detached homes.
 There are multiple options to provide water,
sanitary, and storm services to laneway homes.
 If providing one connection, it should be
designed and planned to easily separate or
reroute in the future.
 On some properties, services might come from
both sides  for example, water on the streetside
and sewer on the laneway, depending on the
slope of the site.
 If the city implements a water metering
program, one meter will be provided per lot.
 Designs should prioritize opportunities to
capture, store, and slow down rainwater on-site.
Urban design and livability
 to support laneway activation, front doors
should face the lane where feasible, and
windows should be provided on the facade
facing the lane.
 Landscape designs should seek opportunities
for green edges, including vertical hedges or
vines on structures.
 Laneway homes on corner lots should be
allowed to orient to the side street, contributing
to the streetscape.
 Setbacks should be flexible and responsive to
the surrounding context.
 One parking space in the rear yard is preferred
to reduce the impact of parking on burnabys
urban fabric.
 Units should include a provision for bike storage,
including a floor area exception.
 There is support for larger sized laneway homes
with floorplans that allow for two-bedroom and
den options.
 Designs should prioritize high ceilings that allow
natural light into living spaces.
Heritage and character
 it is important to incentivize the preservation of
burnabys heritage houses.
 Stratification/subdivision should continue to
be allowed only for heritage revitalization
agreements (hras).
 Construction of laneway homes should be
permitted on lots that do not have access to a
lane or rear street if the development includes
retention of a heritage house through a heritage
revitalization agreement (hra)
 if retaining rather than demolishing a character
home, allowances should be permitted to
enable retention of the existing home and
development of a laneway home, such as
relaxation of parking requirements, setbacks,
density, height, and lot coverage; incentives
should be provided for projects that preserve a
heritage house through an hra, such as such
as permitting larger laneway homes or reducing
parking requirements.
 Heritage policies should be inclusive and
flexible, supporting people to stay in their
communities.
 The city should provide a consistent and clearly
defined set of incentives for property owners
with a heritage or character home to participate
in infill development opportunities.
26
parking and transportation
 primary access to laneway homes should be off
the laneway, with consideration of exceptions for
properties eligible for a heritage revitalization
agreement
 off-street parking requirements should consider
what is currently required under existing zoning
and what the additional expected parking
demand will be, based on tenure and number of
bedrooms.
 It may be possible to have different parking
requirements for applicants depending on a
propertys lot size, surrounding uses, proximity
to transit, and heritage status.
 Parking requirements should reflect ongoing
city transportation studies and processes.
Building and permitting
 the city of burnaby is currently exploring a
development permit process.
 There is interest in both pre-approved plans
and opportunities to include basic requirements
through the zoning bylaw.
 There is preference for some flexibility in the
approvals process to ensure that plans can
be modified without additional lengthy review
processes.
 There is a preference to avoid discretionary
processes, prioritizing prescriptive baseline
requirements such as setbacks, building
heights, and floor areas, to reduce review time
for building permitting staff.
Environment and landscape
 the city of burnaby currently requires step
1 of the bc energy step code and is aiming
to require step 3 for part 9 buildings this year.
There is support to incentivize designs that
exceed step 3 of the bc energy step code.
 Burnabys zoning bylaw requires a maximum of
70% impervious surfaces, introduced in 2005.
Houses built before this do not need to adhere
to this requirement.
 Burnabys zoning bylaw requires a maximum
lot coverage of 40% (+5% for separate garages in
some zones). There is broad support to maintain
existing permeable surfaces wherever possible.
Accessibility
 opportunities for single-storey, accessible
laneway homes should be explored on lots that
are sufficiently large.
 For multi-story accessible or supportive housing
options, designs with at least one bedroom on
the ground floor should be explored, with the
possibility of upstairs living spaces used by a
caregiver.
 For internal layouts, more open concepts with
reduced walls and posts are preferred.
 Designs should be adaptable, with consideration
for future tenants and occupants.
 Access to the units should be in the form of a
clear path from the laneway, with preference for
a smooth ramp instead of stairs.
 Opportunities should be sought to create a
more uniform edge along the lane, with careful
consideration for the placement of waste and
recycling receptacles.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 27
3
what we
are trying
to achieve
28
29
what we are trying to
achieve
there are many ways in which laneway homes
and secondary suites in semi-detached homes
can look and function in burnaby. This process
takes an outcomes-based approach to the
recommendations presented in part 4, in which
proposed directions aim to deliver on community
priorities identified through the public and
stakeholder engagement process (refer to part 1)
and in existing city plans and strategies (refer to
part 2). These include:
housing diversity
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes provide the opportunity to increase
housing diversity in neighbourhoods across
burnaby, particularly in areas that are comprised
predominantly of single family homes.
These new housing choices should contribute to
local rental supply, including for families requiring
two or three bedrooms, and in areas where there
are currently not many rental options. They also
should provide more choice for multi-generational
households, which can also serve to be more
inclusive of cultures and communities in which
multi-generational living is more commonplace.
Ideally laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes should also increase affordability for families
and others either seeking to live in them, or to use
them as mortgage helpers.
The above diagram visualizes a 'family-friendly' unit that offers
multiple bedrooms as well as bicycle storage. 30
accessibility
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes provide the opportunity to offer more
accessible, visitable, and adaptable housing
choices in burnaby. Not only should this increase
the inclusivity of neighbourhoods for all ages
and abilities, these new housing choices also
should help residents to age in place. Accessibility
considerations should be made for both internal
layouts and broader site designs.
Transportation choices
a cornerstone of burnabys transportation plan
is the integration of land use and transportation
systems. By increasing the efficient use of land,
particularly in lower density areas, laneway homes
and suites in semi-detached homes support a shift
away from car-dependency. This not only provides
more transportation choices  including healthy/
active modes of travel and transit  it reduces the
need for private vehicle parking, freeing up space
for other uses.
The above diagram highlights an opportunity for one-storey
laneway homes to offer accessible housing options.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 31
open space and rainwater
management
neighbourhood intensification brings opportunities
to think creatively about the management of open
space and rainwater infiltration. Site design should
be an important consideration in ensuring that
residents of laneway homes and suites in semidetached homes have access to private outdoor
space. It should also ensure that permeable spaces
sufficiently support healthy and resilient watersheds,
and help adapt to the impacts of climate change.
Climate action
the climate emergency demands that all municipal
projects contribute to significant greenhouse gas
emissions reductions. Consistent with burnabys
climate action framework, laneway homes and
suites in semi-detached homes support compact
growth, which encourages more trips taken by
active modes and transit (as noted above). These
new housing choices should also incorporate
measures that enable them to be net zero carbon
buildings.
The above diagram visualizes the relationship between permeable green spaces that allow
for rainwater infiltration and impermeable surfaces, such as standard roofs and streets.
32
livability
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes should be livable: appropriate, comfortable,
and dignified. Considerations such as generous
ceiling heights and access to natural light and green
space form an important part of making these new
housing choices highly livable for residents from all
walks of life.
This illustration was inspired by conversations overheard at the in-person community
workshop, summarizing the role of laneway homes in supporting livability in burnaby.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 33
heritage and character
cities are continually changing in the face of new
challenges and opportunities, and laneway homes
and suites in semi-detached homes will be part of
the evolution of local neighbourhood character. At
the same time, development of these new housing
choices should leverage opportunities to protect
and revitalize burnabys heritage buildings.
Privacy and safety
the design of laneway homes and suites in semidetached homes should consider privacy needs
both within their sites and to/from neighbouring
sites. At the same time, the addition of more
residents in a given area provides opportunities for
eyes on the lane/street, increasing sense of safety.
Likewise, the design of these new housing choices
should also account for emergency service access.
Public space and public life
with more people living in burnabys
neighbourhoods  and specifically along lanes 
there are exciting new opportunities to activate
these lanes in new ways. Increased opportunities
for public life and social interaction, for example,
should be considered as laneway homes and suites
in semi-detached homes are brought to life in
burnaby.
34
photo credit: smallworks.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 35
4
how we are
going to
achieve it
36
photo credit: lanefab.
37
zoning and lot suitability
intent
to enable laneway homes to be a viable option on
as many residential lots as possible.
Recommendations
 allow laneway homes in conjunction with a
single family home in all zoning districts that
permit single family residential use.
 Locate laneway homes on lots with driveway
access to the rear or side of the lot via a lane or
street.
 Permit both a secondary suite and laneway
home on a single family lot.
 Allow construction of laneway homes on
properties without lane or street access to the
rear property through heritage revitalization
agreements (hras).
 Consider laneway homes for a district lots in
conjunction with the agricultural land review
currently underway and, where applicable,
consistent with agricultural land reserve (alr)
regulations.
The input, learnings, and considerations
summarized in parts 1, 2, and 3 of this report have
been synthesized into a set of recommendations
for the housing choices program for laneway
homes and suites in semi-detached homes.
The recommendations encompass zoning and
lot suitability, laneway and public realm, siting,
identification and access, parking, landscaping
(including rainwater permeability and private open
space), trees, servicing and waste/recycling,
topography, building size and height, building
site coverage, building form, interface with the
lane or street, privacy and overlook, lighting, and
adaptability and accessibility.
These recommendations are intended to provide
high level direction, with the understanding that a
deeper review will be undertaken by the city that
will include more detailed directions for zoning and
other means of implementation.
How we are going to
achieve it laneway homes
38
tenure
intent
to ensure laneway homes help increase the
supply of rental housing in neighbourhoods across
burnaby.
Recommendations
 require laneway home occupancy to be rental
only.
 Align laneway home implementation with the
city of burnabys regulations for short term
rentals.
 Owner would not be required to live on the
property.
 Explore alternative tenure options in future
program phases, including stratification/
subdivision with provisions for below-market
ownership.
 Continue to allow stratification/subdivision
through heritage revitalization agreements
(hras).
Photo credit: lanefab.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 39
laneway and public realm
intent
to explore opportunities for public realm upgrades
in areas where there is significant uptake of laneway
homes.
Recommendations
 where construction of multiple laneway
homes may occur at the same time on the
same block, pursue opportunities for larger
off-site improvements. These could include
but are not necessarily limited to permeable
paving, expanded landscape planting, rainwater
management features, and traffic calming
measures such as speed humps, ground
murals, reduced road widths.
 Explore the creation of a laneway partnership
program to support residents in the stewardship
of lanes. For example, this may be in the
form of an adopt a lane volunteer program,
through which residents could apply for city
grants for public realm improvements, such as
landscaping or public art.
 Consider implementing a laneway naming
program to contribute to the identity and
character of lanes.
40
burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 41
siting
intent
to optimize housing choices on as many lots as
possible by: allowing laneway homes to coexist
with a wide variety of existing homes; and by
providing additional housing options for total site
redevelopment.
Recommendations
 locate the laneway home in the rear yard as
defined by the zoning bylaw.
 Require a minimum 0.91m (3) setback to the rear
property line.
 Require the side yard to be same as that of the
principal dwelling, as per the zoning bylaw.
 Do not require additional separation between
the laneway home and principal dwelling, or any
other structures such as garages or accessory
buildings, beyond what is required by the bc
building code.
 Consider siting relaxations, including reduced
side yard setbacks, through board of
variance (bov) (in case of hardship) or future
development variance permit (dvp) processes.
Siting relaxations could also be considered
when retaining an existing heritage or character
home.
Site
the above diagram illustrates one design option for
laneway homes that responds to the existing context.
42
this illustration highlights the various relationships to
consider when siting a laneway home on a property.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 43
parking
intent
to provide sufficient infrastructure to accommodate
a range of mobility needs, including a personal
vehicle.
Recommendations
 require one on-site vehicle parking pad for
three residential units (minimum 2.74m (9)
x 6.1m (20) each, in an open pad or carport)
perpendicular to the lane, with electric vehicle
charging infrastructure roughed in.
 This requirement may be reviewed
following completion of burnabys citywide parking review.
 Considerations for a future review of
parking requirements include, but
are not necessarily limited to, tree
preservation and supporting fully
accessible one-storey laneway homes.
Rationale
residential sites with a lane have the opportunity for vehicle parking on private property as
well as street parking at the front. On a 30 lot, which is the smallest lot width in burnaby,
there is potentially space for up to two parking spaces at the curb, and one to three parking
spaces off the lane.
As shown in the diagram at right, having more parking may be feasible but limits the floor
area and green space available. One off-street parking space is recommended in order to
promote livability with more floor area and green space.
 Allow new or existing garages to count toward
meeting the minimum parking requirement. If
the garage is attached to the laneway home, the
floor area of the garage will be included in the
laneway homes floor area ratio (far).
 Continue to exclude the floor area of new or
existing detached garages (up to 42m2
(452sf)
from the overall far for the site.
 Allow an far exemption for a bike garage.
(refer to building size recommendations on the
following pages).
44
these illustrations demonstrate how
varying levels of parking can influence a
laneway home's form and site design.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 45
identification and access
intent
to provide necessary fire and emergency access,
and clear addressing from the street.
Recommendations
 require a continuous fire access path that is a
minimum of 0.91m (3) wide, with a minimum
1.98m (6-6) overhead clearance. The surface
of the access path should be concrete or
interlocking pavers, with no flagstones or
intermittent pavers that might provide a tripping
hazard. Specifications to be verified with the
city's fire department.
 Provide an address number that is a minimum
of 152.4mm (6) high and visible from the street.
Also provide an address number that is visible
from the lane.
 Provide a mailbox, visible from the street,
adjacent to the address numbers or with
numbers on the mailbox.
Photo credit: lanefab.
46
these illustrations demonstrate how laneway homes may be
accessed from either the lane, or fronting street via the sideyard.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 47
landscaping, permeability, and
private open space
intent
to provide open space, private outdoor space, and
landscaping suitable for the number of residential
units on site. To improve environmental factors such
as increased biodiversity, decreased urban heat
island effect, and increased stormwater infiltration.
Recommendations
 allow a maximum of 70% impermeable
area, including all buildings, patios/decks,
impermeable driveways, and pavers.
 This requirement aligns with the citys
zoning bylaw. Consider reducing
maximum impermeable area to 60%
during future phases of the laneway
home program.
 Require private outdoor space for the laneway
home in the form of either a minimum 4m2 (43sf)
patio with a minimum dimension of 1.5m (5), or a
minimum 3m2 (32.3sf) balcony with a minimum
dimension of 0.9m (3).
Trees
intent
to maintain or increase the amount of trees and
canopy by retaining existing healthy trees and
providing new plantings.
Recommendations
 require retention of all trees that are greater than
203.2mm (8) diameter at breast height (dbh)
whose root zones do not intersect the footprint
of the new laneway home, proposed excavation
path for sewer / water servicing, or pathway to
the rear lot from the street.
 Provide a minimum of two trees on the site,
which can be either a retained existing tree(s) or
a new one(s).
 Replace any removed trees as per the
requirements of the citys tree bylaw.
 Where trees are to be retained, provide tree
barriers proportional to tree diameter as defined
by city of burnaby.
Photo credit: lanefab.
48
servicing, waste, and recycling
intent
to ensure that laneway homes are efficiently
serviced and respect the citys infrastructure
capacity, while reducing development costs and
minimizing impacts on existing neighbourhoods.
Recommendations
 require separate sewer, water, and power
servicing.
 Enable garbage and recycling totes to be
shared or separate as per the citys bylaws and/
or at the owners discretion.
 Require a dedicated outdoor area in the rear
yard for garbage and recycling bins that is a
minimum of 0.61m (2) x 1.83m (6), and to be
shown on site plans as part of the approvals
process. Locate this area away from bedroom
windows.
Rationale
separate servicing ensures sufficient capacity for both the
principal dwelling and laneway home, as well as offering flexibility
for potential future redevelopment configurations.
Topography
intent
to utilize the sites topography to optimize both
indoor living space and private outdoor space.
Where there is significant slope, to minimize
excavation, site dewatering, and exposed
foundation walls, and to ensure views from adjacent
properties are respected.
Recommendations
 discourage retaining walls at the property line.
 Minimize exposed foundations for laneway
homes on uphill lots.
 Encourage the siting of usable outdoor space
that aligns with the sites slope. For example,
provide patios that are accessed from upper
floors.
 Ensure that maximum building height
calculations are equally applicable to sloped
sites.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 49
size
intent
to allow a wide range of sizes, from studios to
family sized, with additional floor area beyond what
is currently allowed for the primary dwelling.
Recommendations
 allow up to an additional 0.2 far based on
existing zoning if all other requirements such as
lot coverage and setbacks are met.
 Count attached or enclosed garage space for
the laneway home toward the sites total far.
 Provide an underheight (3.9') floor area
exclusion for bike garages: 6m2
(65sf), which
should include a door to the exterior that has a
minimum width of 2m (6-6).
 Do not count carports that are open on two or
more sides toward the sites total far. Open
may include a fence, gate, or wall that is a
maximum of 1.2m (4').
Building
rationale
110 to 140m2
(1200 to 1500sf) can provide a family sized three bedroom, two bathroom
laneway home. To support larger laneway homes, an additional 0.2 far is recommended
on all lot sizes, subject to the maximum allowable laneway home size.
 Allow laneway homes to be a minimum size of
30m2
(323 sf).
 This requirement aligns with the citys
zoning bylaw and may be updated
during future phases of the laneway
home program, with opportunities
to reduce the minimum size via a
development variance process (dvp).
 Allow laneways homes to be a maximum size of
140m2
(1506 sf).
50
photo credit: smallworks.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 51
coverage
intent
to maintain open space while allowing laneway
homes on as many existing sites as possible.
Recommendations
 allow a maximum 45% site coverage.
Rationale
currently lot coverage in burnaby is 40% plus 5% for accessory
buildings in many zones. For most principal dwellings, lot coverage
is substantially less than 40%, allowing room for development of
accessory buildings without exceeding the 45% standard.
The above diagram illustrates the relationship
between buildings and open space on a lot.
52
height
intent
allow a wide range of styles, comfortable ceiling
heights, livable upper floors, and well insulated
roofs.
Recommendations
 allow a maximum height of 7.6m (25)
 allow a maximum average / flat height of 6.7m
(22)
 to allow for thicker roof insulation, enable
additional allowable height for homes achieving
passive house, net zero, or bc energy code
step 5: 0.5m (1-7)
 require that the laneway home height not
exceed the height of the principal dwelling.
Rationale
generous height requirements improve
livability of the upper floor, provide headroom
clearance at stairs, and encourage well
insulated roof assemblies.
For a gable roof design with a 25 peak
height, and 22 average height, the eave
height would be 19. This is high enough for
the second floor to have an internal spring
point for the ceiling that is ~7 above the
finished floor. This allows for stairs, windows,
and usable headroom throughout the upper
floor.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 53
form, foundation, and roof
design building performance
intent
allow a wide range of styles and shapes, while
setting minimum standards for life safety,
accessibility, and environmental performance, while
minimizing massing and shadowing impacts on
adjacent properties.
Recommendations
 require a permanent foundation.
 Require that butterfly roofs, flat roofs, or other
similar roof forms where the eave height is also
the maximum height, stay below the average
roof height.
 Allow mixed roof forms if they fit underneath
a height envelope defined by the peak and
average heights.
 Permit basements and count them toward the
sites total far.
 Require basements to have a minimum 2.44m
(8) ceiling height.
 Permit crawl spaces in alignment with the citys
zoning bylaw.
 Allow a maximum depth below adjacent grade
of 1.83m (6).
Intent
to ensure that design and construction practices
reflect a commitment to climate action and help
meet the citys greenhouse gas emissions reduction
targets.
Recommendations
 require laneway homes to meet the citys
energy step code targets.
Heritage
intent
to ensure the implementation of the laneway
housing program supports protection of the citys
heritage buildings.
Recommendations
 do not provide additional far if the principal
dwelling is listed on the heritage registry
and demolished as part of a site-wide
redevelopment.
54
interface with lane or street lighting
intent
to create an inviting lanescape that improves the
beauty, safety, and environmental quality of the
lane.
Recommendations
 where an entry door faces the lane, provide a
minimum 1.52m (5) setback.
 Provide glazing on a minimum of 10% of the lane
elevation.
 Provide lane plantings in areas not utilized for
parking or pathways.
 For corner lots, require the laneway home to
have a door or highly visible entrance path from
the flanking street.
Intent
to minimize excessive lighting of exterior facades to
reduce impacts on neighbours and the environment
at night, while providing for safety and security.
Recommendations
 require exterior lights more than 2.44m (8)
above grade to be down-lights only.
Privacy and overlook
intent
to minimize opportunities for direct overlook from
upper floor windows and balconies into adjacent
rear yards.
Recommendations
 face balconies toward the lane.
 For upper floor windows oriented toward
adjacent residential yards, require a sill height
greater than 1.52m (5) or to be translucent
glazed.
Adaptable/accessible units
intent
to incentivize the creation of homes that are
fully accessible, adaptable / visitable, or able
to be occupied on just one level in a two-storey
configuration.
Recommendations
 provide a three-piece bathroom on the main
floor of the laneway home.
 Encourage the provision of a clear, smooth path
of access to the laneway. Use a ramp rather than
stairs.
 Encourage diverse accessible and adaptable
design strategies, including more open concept
layouts that reduce the number of walls and
posts, and include 863.6mm (34) clear interior
doors, lever handles, powered entry door
openers and gates, and interior lifts.
 Consider excluding space for interior elevators
or lifts from the sites total far.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 55
identification and access
intent
to provide fire and emergency access and clear
addressing from the street.
Recommendations
 require a continuous fire access path that is
a minimum of 0.91m (3) wide, with minimum
1.98m (6-6) overhead clearance. The surface
of the access path should be concrete or
interlocking pavers, with no flagstones or
intermittent pavers that might provide a tripping
hazard. Specifications to be verified with the
city's fire department.
 Provide an address number that is a minimum
of 152.4mm (6) high and visible from the street.
Provide a mailbox, visible from the street,
adjacent to the address numbers or with
numbers on the mailbox.
 Provide a dedicated exterior door to the
secondary suite. Entrances should be
welcoming and weather protected.
Suites in semi-detached
homes
zoning and lot suitability
intent
to enable secondary suites in semi-detached
homes to be a viable option on as many residential
lots as possible.
Recommendations
 allow secondary suites in conjunction with a
semi-detached home in all zoning districts that
permit two-family residential use.
 Lots should have driveway access to the rear or
side of the property via a lane or street.
Tenure
intent
to ensure secondary suites in semi-detached
homes help increase the supply of rental housing in
neighbourhoods across burnaby.
Recommendations
 require secondary suite occupancy to be rental
only.
 Align secondary suites in semi-detached homes
implementation with the city of burnabys
regulations for short term rentals.
 Owner would not be required to live on the
property.
56
the above rendering highlights various design considerations for suites in semi-detached homes,
including parking requirements, private outdoor spaces, waste and recycling, and rainwater infiltration.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 57
parking
intent
to provide sufficient infrastructure to accommodate
a range of mobility needs, including a personal
vehicle.
Recommendations
 require two on-site vehicle parking pads for four
residential units (minimum 2.74m (9) x 6.1m (20)
each, in an open pad or carport) perpendicular
to the lane, with electric vehicle charging
infrastructure roughed in.
 This requirement may be reviewed
following completion of burnabys citywide parking review.
Rationale
residential sites with a lane have the opportunity
for vehicle parking on private property as well
as street parking at the front. On a 30 lot, which
is the smallest lot width in burnaby, there is
space for approximately two parking spaces at
the curb, and one to three parking spaces at
the lane. Renters have relatively lower rates of
personal vehicle ownership so will have lower
parking requirements.
Intent
to provide open space, private outdoor space, and
landscaping suitable for the number of residential
units on site. To improve environmental factors such
as increased biodiversity, decreased urban heat
island effect, and increased rainwater infiltration.
Recommendations
 allow a maximum of 70% impermeable
area, including all buildings, patios/decks,
impermeable driveways, and pavers.
 This requirement aligns with the citys
zoning bylaw. Consider reducing
maximum impermeable area to 60%
during future phases of the housing
choices program.
 Require private outdoor space for the secondary
suite in the form of a minimum 4m2 (43sf) patio
with a minimum dimension of 1.5m (5).
Landscaping, permeability, and
private outdoor space
intent
to allow a wide range of sizes, from studio to family
sized, with additional floor area beyond what is
currently allowed for the principal dwelling.
Recommendations
 count all habitable space toward the sites total
far.
 Do not require a maximum secondary suite size,
as per the bc building code.
 Consider offering additional density for semidetached units with secondary suites. An
additional 0.10-0.15 far would support this form
of housing in all neighbourhoods.
Size
58
the above rendering explores how access and dedicated outdoor spaces can
contribute to the identity and and livability of suites in semi-detached homes.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 59
intent
to ensure secondary suites are as livable as
possible, with access to natural light and views to
the outdoors.
Recommendations
 allow a maximum depth below adjacent grade
to be 1.5m (5)
 consider guidelines for minimum ceiling heights.
 Require that each room has at least one window
that receives direct natural light.
 Encourage the use of window wells and patio
areas to enhance access to direct natural light.
Height / depth
intent
to ensure that design and construction practices
reflect a commitment to climate action and help
meet the citys greenhouse gas emissions reduction
targets.
Recommendations
 require secondary suites in semi-detached
homes to meet the citys energy step code
targets.
Building performance
intent
to create an inviting streetscape that improves the
beauty, safety, and environmental quality of the
street.
Recommendations
 require that the suite entry be visible from the
street.
 Require that the suite entry is no more than 5
below grade.
 Encourage decorative landscaping, walkway
lighting, and a dedicated pathway.
Interface with the street
the above diagram represents some of the suites in semidetached home design options that were used to inform and
inspire discussions in community workshops.
60
photo credit: lanefab.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 61
5
implementation
62
photo credit: lanefab.
63
in addition to the planning and design
recommendations outlined in the previous section,
there are a number of actions that the city can
undertake to support successful implementation of
the housing choices program for laneway homes
and suites in semi-detached homes. Informed by
insights gleaned from stakeholders who design,
build, and develop these housing types, additional
recommended actions are outlined to the right.
Implementation city of burnaby actions
we heard in the engagement process with
industry experts and residents that there is a strong
desire for quick and efficient implementation of
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes across burnaby. This section outlines some
recommendations that aim to increase the success
of implementation.
Program implementation
 immediately implement the program for
laneway homes and secondary suites in semidetached homes.
 After a period of two years  or after a certain
number of laneway homes and suites in semidetached homes are constructed  undertake
a review of its performance. Account for new
directions in the citys new official community
plan, which is currently under review.
 Approve laneway homes and secondary suites
in semi-detached homes through a standard
building permitting process, with limited
opportunities to vary requirements through
development variance permit (dvp) processes.
The city should develop clear guidelines for
relaxations that would be supported.
 The city should create clear guidelines for
owners of character and heritage homes to
access incentives and relaxations.
64
pre-approved designs
 if a project has been permitted under the
standard building permit path, make it available
as a quicker approval option.
 Explore the creation of an online portal with preapproved designs that could be obtained and
approved through a quicker permitting process.
Simplified development requirements
 limit the need for applications to be approved
by council or through the board of variance,
or to have to undertake neighbour notification
processes.
 Limit requirements to produce a landscape plan
as part the permitting process.
 Develop a simplified tree removal process that is
predictable and comprehensive.
 For servicing costs for laneway homes, consider
a similar approach as the citys secondary suite
requirements.
Construction practices
 to reduce embodied emissions (emissions
associated with materials and construction
processes), ensure that it is easier to build above
grade than below grade.
 Explore opportunities to design and build
laneway homes converted from garages or
existing structures.
Other policies with potential broader application
explore opportunities to develop policies for
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes that could also be applied more broadly
to all residential building types across the city. For
example:
energy efficiency
 support additional floor area ratio (far)
or financial incentives for high performance
buildings for all low-rise residential forms. This
includes homes achieving passive house, net
zero, or bc energy code step 5.
Rainwater management
 ensure that all future residential development
meet minimum rainwater infiltration and capture
requirements.
 If considerable rainwater storage tanks (1000
gallons or more) are provided, offer a reduction
on storm connection fees or a rebate on
permitting.
Accessibility
 develop detailed criteria for building design
relaxations that demonstrate accessibility
criteria.
 Identify minimum design guidelines for all
residential buildings, including considerations
for entranceways, space requirements, and
adaptable features.
 Include exemptions for buildings with a main
floor below 600ft2
.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 65
next steps
6
66
photo credit: lanefab.
67
this program recommendations report is intended
to inform development of more detailed regulations
for laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes.
City staff will provide this report to burnaby city
council for their review, and will also provide
the results of a financial analysis that is currently
underway. Based on council direction, staff may
undertake further technical reviews to develop
a draft program for laneway homes and suites in
semi-detached homes. Upon completion of a draft
program, staff anticipate hosting a series of open
houses to get feedback on the program, prior to
finalization of the program and necessary bylaws.
Next steps
68
burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 69
future
considerations
7
70
71
as noted in part 5, there are limited opportunities to
vary requirements for laneway homes and suites in
semi-detached homes. Should the city of burnaby
choose to develop clear guidelines for relaxations
that would be supported through the development
variance permit (dvp) process, the following
considerations could be made and/or adapted:
future considerations
laneway homes
 sites without lanes  laneway homes may be
located on a lot without a lane following a more
comprehensive review by the city and provided
other intents are met.
 Siting  laneway home may be located in a
side yard or front yard, provided all other intents
are met.
 Parking  for corner sites and sites adjacent to
parks, the minimum parking requirement may
be reduced to zero due to the availability of
more parking in those locations (compared to
mid-block sites). Likewise, parking requirements
may be reduced to zero if the site is within 400m
of frequent transit.
 Private outdoor space  private outdoor
space requirements may be relaxed provided
the intent is met via other means on site. For
example, accessible green roofs or larger
shared outdoor spaces could contribute to the
sites approach to open space.
 Coverage  site coverage may be relaxed to
50% with supporting strategies that demonstrate
an acceptable level of rainwater infiltration on
site (e. G. Green roof) or otherwise reduce site
runoff (e. G. Low-flow toilets).
 Trees  where possible, existing large trees
could be retained by granting conditional
relaxations to setbacks and site coverage. If
the canopy/root zone of trees being retained
intersect with the building footprint, sewer
excavation, or access path from the front
property to the laneway home, an arborist
should be retained to provide a retention plan
and to supervise the excavation.
 Privacy and overlook  balcony locations and
window details may be relaxed if meeting the
intent.
 Lighting  lighting details may be relaxed if
meeting the intent.
 Accessibility  bathroom requirements may
be relaxed for small unit sizes (600 ft2
or less) or
where site conditions would make a main floor
bathroom untenable.
72
suites in semi-detached homes
 parking  for corner sites and sites adjacent to
parks, the minimum parking requirement may
be reduced to zero due to the availability of
more parking in those locations (compared to
mid-block sites). Likewise, parking requirements
may be reduced to zero if the site is within 400m
of frequent transit.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 73
thank you