Meeting 2022 February 14
COUNCIL REPORT
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
HIS WORSHIP, THE MAYOR
AND COUNCILLORS
SUBJECT: HOUSING CHOICES: LANEWAY HOMES AND SUITES IN SEMIDETACHED HOUSES
RECOMMENDATIONS:
1. THAT Council approve the process to develop regulations and guidelines for:
a) laneway homes in single family areas;
b) additional accessory dwellings in single family homes without a laneway
home; and
c) two suites in semi-detached homes or four-plexes in duplex zoned lots.
2. THAT staff explore the affordability aspect of allowing increased densification in
single and two family zoned areas.
REPORT
The Planning and Development Committee, at its meeting held on 2022 February 02,
received and adopted the attached report outlining a process to develop regulations and
guidelines for laneway homes and secondary suites in semi-detached houses, as a first
step in implementing the Housing Choices program.
Arising from discussion, the Committee AMENDED the recommendation to develop
regulations and guidelines for a) laneway homes in single family areas; b) additional
accessory dwellings in single family homes without a laneway home; and c) two suites in
semi-detached homes or four-plexes in duplex zoned lots, and added recommendation
No. 2 directing staff to explore the affordability aspect of allowing increased densification
in single and two family zoned areas.
Respectfully submitted,
Councillor P. Calendino
Chair
Councillor S. Dhaliwal
Vice Chair
Copied to: Chief Administrative Officer
Deputy CAO / CFO
GM Corporate Services
GM Engineering
GM Planning and Development
City Solicitor
Chief Building Inspector
City of
Burnaby
Meeting 2022 February 02
COMMITTEE REPORT
TO: CHAIR AND MEMBERS
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
COMMITTEE
FROM: GENERAL MANAGER
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
DATE: 2022 January 27
FILE: 4500 20
SUBJECT: HOUSING CHOICES: LANEWAY HOMES AND SUITES IN SEMI
DETACHED HOUSES
PURPOSE: To outline a process to develop regulations and guidelines for laneway homes
and secondary suites in semi-detached houses as a first step in implementing the
Housing Choices program.
RECOMMENDATION:
1. THAT the Committee recommend that Council approve the process to develop
regulations and guidelines for laneway homes and secondary suites in semi-detached
houses, as outlined in this report.
REPORT
1.0 INTRODUCTION
On 2021 December 06, Council adopted HOME: Burnaby's Housing and Homelessness Strategy
(HOME Strategy), a ten year action plan for housing in Bumaby. Action 1.1 of the HOME Strategy
calls for the City to implement a program to introduce more infill housing choices to Bumaby. The
first phase of this program (to be known as the "Housing Choices" program) includes the
introduction of laneway homes and suites in semi-detached houses ("suites in semis").
On 2021 Febmary 22, Council received the Burnaby Housing Needs Report, which identified a
need for more rental housing and more housing choices for those seeking ground-oriented housing
in walkable, residential neighbourhoods.
On 2019 July 29, Council adopted the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community
Housing, including Recommendation #1 to develop a plan for introducing new housing forms and
family oriented housing in a variety of neighbourhoods.
On 2018 December 3, Council adopted a motion to examine the ability to facilitate laneway homes
in single family zones and secondary suites in duplexes (semi-detached houses).
To: Planning and Development Committee
From: General Manager Planning and Development
Re: Housing Choices: Laneway Homes and
Suites in Semi-detached Houses
2022 January 27. Page 2
This report outlines a process to develop regulations and guidelines for laneway homes and
secondary suites in semis, as a first step in implementing a broader infill housing program, called
the "Housing Choices" program. Additional types of infill housing will be reviewed in future
phases of the Housing Choices program, and in conjunction with the upcoming update to the
Official Community Plan (OCP).
2.0 POLICY SECTION
The Housing Choices program generally aligns with the following Council adopted plans, reports
and policies: Corporate Strategic Plan (2017), the Official Community Plan (1998), HOME:
Burnaby's Housing and Homelessness Strategy (2021), Burnaby 's Housing Needs Report (2021),
and the Mayor's Task Force on Community Housing Recommendations Report (2019).
3.0 HOUSING CHOICES PROGRAM
Housing Choices is a multi-phased, multi-year program to introduce new housing forms to
Bumaby's neighbourhoods. It will focus on missing middle housing, which includes duplexes,
triplexes, fourplexes, sixplexes, courtyard clusters, rowhomes, townhomes and low-rise
apartments, and will also introduce accessory units such as flex suites, secondary suites and
laneway homes.
The Housing Choices program will begin by introducing laneway homes and suites in semis into
single and two-family zone districts, respectively. Similar reviews will be undertaken for other
housing types in the Housing Choices program in conjunction with the OCP update.
4.0 LANEWAY HOMES AND SUITES IN SEMIS: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION
The work outlined in this section will result in detailed regulations and guidelines for laneway
homes and suites in semis. It will determine technical requirements to support building design,
address parking and servicing needs, and will require amendments to the OCP and the Burnaby
Zoning Bylaw. In order to address community needs and concerns, a consultation process seeking
input on design considerations and publicizing the program will accompany this work. Key
elements of the implementation process for laneway homes and suites in semis are reviewed in
this section; a step-by-step outline of the process and schedule is provided in Section 5.0 below.
Although many specifics will be developed during the process, the basic parameters for these
housing types are outlined in Table 1 below.
To: Planning and Development Committee
From: General Manager Planning and Development
Re: Housing Choices: Laneway Homes and
Suites in Semi-detached Houses
2022 January 27. Page 3
Table 1: Housing l^pes
Description Principal
Building
Type
Location on
Lot
Maximum Units
per Lot
Laneway
Homes
A detached dwelling
imit that is located on
the same lot as a
single family home.
Single
family
dwelling
In the rear
yard, facing a
lane
Three:
• Single family
dwelling
• Secondary suite
• Laneway home
Suites in Semis A self-contained,
secondary dwelling
unit located within a
semi-detached imit.
Twofamily
dwelling
Within a semi
detached
dwelling
Four:
• Two semi
detached units
• Secondary
dwelling in each
unit of the semi
detached
dwelling.
The work outlined in this report will focus on permitting laneway homes on single-family
properties that have access to a constructed laneway, and permitting suites in semi-detached houses
on two-family properties that have access to a constructed laneway. Permitted zoning districts,
access requirements, minimum lot dimensions, and other criteria will be determined during the
review.
Public Consultation
The Housing Choices program will be publicized via the City's website and social media
platforms. A dedicated webpage will be set up to provide information on the process, with options
to sign up for updates, ask questions and provide comments. There will be opportunities for public
input throughout the process.
A public survey will be launched to raise awareness, gather feedback on some of the key design
elements (parking, size and height of laneway homes), and to invite volunteers to sign up for design
workshops. The design workshops will provide a more detailed forum to listen and share ideas,
and will be used to determine the finer details of the program. When the draft program has been
developed, a series of Open Houses (potentially virtual, depending on the public health guidance
available at the time) will be held to present information and gather any ftirther feedback before
the program is finalized.
To: Planning and Development Committee
From: General Manager Planning and Development
Re: Housing Choices: Laneway Homes and
Suites in Semi-detached Houses
2022 January 27. Page 4
Technical Review
A technical review will be undertaken to develop program elements such as addressing, servicing,
and to determine lot suitability. It will also include a design review to establish key regulations
such as unit size, height and massing, setbacks and access, landscaping and parking configuration.
Guidelines will be developed to support high quality, accessible, sustainable design. A financial
analysis will also be undertaken to ensure the feasibility of different policy approaches, such as
measures to support the retention of existing buildings and to minimize land speculation.
Official Community Plan Amendment
Bumaby's Official Community Plan (OCP) supports increasing housing choices and calls for more
ground-oriented housing across the City. However, when the OCP was adopted in 1998, suites in
semis were not yet permitted by the BC Building Code and laneway homes were less common. As
a result, these forms of housing and their resulting densities are not specifically identified in the
current Residential Framework. An OCP bylaw amendment will be required to support this work.
Bylaw Amendments
In order to permit and regulate laneway homes and suites in semis, amendments to the Bumaby
Zoning Bylaw will be required. Specific amendments would include:
• Addition of definitions for the new uses;
• Addition of laneway homes and suites in semis as permitted uses in suitable zone districts;
• Addition of setback, height, floor area, off-street parking and other regulations; and
• Revision of existing bylaw provisions to reflect the new uses and incorporate any
necessary changes and additions.
In addition, amendments to other City bylaws may be required, such as the Building Bylaw and
the Fees Bylaw.
Implementation and Monitoring
Implementation will involve establishing the development review process, staff training, and the
preparation of forms, procedures, and information guides for efficient processing of applications.
This will also involve setting up mapping and data collection procedures to manage, monitor and
report on program outcomes.
4.0 PROCESS AND SCHEDULE
An overview of the process and schedule to implement laneway homes and suites in semis is shown
in Table 2, below.
To: Planning and Development Committee
From: General Manager Planning and Development
Re: Housing Choices: Laneway Homes and
Suites in Semi-detached Houses
2022 January 27. Page 5
Table 2: Schedule to Implement Laneway Homes and Suites in Semis
# ■Task - ^ Description Schedule
1. Public Consultation 1 Launch survey to raise awareness and collect
public input on key design elements (e.g., ofFstreet parking, height, size, outdoor space).
Notify and seek engagement with local First
Nations.
Winter
2021/22
2. Technical Review Undertake technical reviews to develop
recommendations for program elements such as
servicing, building height and size, ofF-street
parking and requirements for outdoor space.
This will also include a review oF the financial
implications of different policy approaches.
Spring 2022
3. Public Consultation 2 Host design workshops to gather input from the
public, the development community, staff, and
other housing stakeholders.
Spring/
Summer 2022
4. Draft Program Develop draft regulations and circulate intemally
for review and input.
Summer 2022
5. Public Consultation 3 Host Open Houses (potentially virtual) to present
the draft program, seek feedback, and answer
questions.
Fall 2022
6. Final Program Present the final program to Council. Winter
2022/23
7. OCP Amendments Amend the Official Community Plan to support
the program.
Winter
2022/23
8. Bylaw Amendments Amend the Zoning Bylaw and other City bylaws,
as needed, to support the program.
Winter
2022/23
9. Implementation and
Monitoring
Launch the approvals process and distribute
communications materials. Monitor progress.
Spring
2023;
monitoring to
continue with
annual
reporting.
To: Planning and Development Committee
From: General Manager Planning and Development
Re: Housing Choices: Laneway Homes and
Suites in Semi-detached Houses
2022 January 27. Page 6
5.0 CELLAR PROVISIONS - RIO, Rll, R12 DISTRICTS
As the proposed process for suites in two-family dwellings and laneway homes includes a robust
public consultation component, it is considered appropriate and timely to consider extending the
recently adopted cellar provisions for R Districts to include the RIO, Rll, R12 Districts. Doing
so would allow for an equal application of these provisions across all single and two-family
districts. As such, it is recommended that staff be authorized to consult on this in concert with the
foregoing work on laneway homes and suites in semi-detached houses.
6.0 CONCLUSION
This report provides an overview of the work process to begin the first phase of the Housing
Choices program, which will implement Action 1.1 of the HOME Strategy. This work will result
in regulations and guidelines to permit the development of laneway homes and suites in semis.
Under the proposed process, it is anticipated that the bylaw amendments required to support these
two new forms of housing would be brought to Council in winter 2022/23, followed by
implementation in spring 2023.
E.W. Kozak, General Manager
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
SC:sa
Copied to: Chief Administrative Officer
Deputy Chief Administrative Officer and Chief Financial Officer
General Manager Corporate Services
General Manager Engineering
City Clerk
City Solicitor
Chief Building Inspector
R:'Ltmg Range Clerical\DOCS^€ommttlee Reporls\2022\Housmg Choices-lMnevay Homes & Suites in Seml-tlelachedHouses p022.02.02).docx