LANEWAY HOMES | FINAL PROGRAM FOR PHASE 1A

Zoning Districts:
- Permitted in R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, R6, R9, R10, R11, R12, and RM6 Districts

Eligible Lots Properties must have:
- a single-family home; and
- vehicular access to the rear yard from the side or rear of the property, via an open lane or residential street.

Additional considerations:
- Corner lots or double-fronted lots (“through lots”) that do not have access to an open lane will require access approval from the Engineering Department.
- If a lot is near a stream, Streamside Protection and Enhancement Area regulations may limit the ability to construct a laneway home. (See Section 6.23 of the Zoning Bylaw).

Units per Lot:
- Eligible lots may have up to 3 units.

Tenure:
- A lot with a laneway home must remain under a single title. This means that a laneway home cannot be stratified or otherwise subdivided, and cannot be sold separately from the main home.
- A laneway home may be rented out as a long-term rental unit. Short-term rentals will not be permitted in laneway homes.
- The owner will not be required to live on the property. However, if the owner lives off-site, an annual house rental business license will be required.

Floor Area:
- Maximum floor area for a laneway home:
  - Up to 20% of the lot area, but no larger than 140 m2 (1,507 sq. ft.).
- Minimum floor area for a laneway home:
  - 32.52 m2 (350 sq. ft.).
  
Floor area calculation for a laneway home will exclude:
- Floor area of the principal dwelling
- Floor area of carports that are attached to the laneway home
- Floor area of any accessory buildings that are not attached to the laneway home (e.g. garages, sheds, workshops, bike sheds/lockers)

Height:
- Maximum height for a laneway home:
  - No more than 2 storeys; and
  - Up to 7.6 m (24.93 ft.) for a sloping roof; or
  - Up to 6.7 m (21.98 ft.) for a flat roof.

Additional considerations:
- The height of a laneway home will be measured from the lowest point (lower of the natural or finished grade) on the perimeter of the laneway home.
- A laneway home cannot exceed the maximum height permitted for the principal dwelling, as permitted in the Zoning Bylaw.
- Basements are permitted in laneway homes and will count as one storey.

Housing Choices Laneway Homes
City of Burnaby Planning and Development Department
Burnaby.ca/HousingChoices | housingchoices@burnaby.ca

Location on a Lot:
- Minimum setbacks for a laneway home:
  - 2.4 m (7.87 ft.) from the main house, a detached garage, or other accessory building
  - 1.2 m (3.94 ft.) from the rear lot line and side lot line

Additional considerations:
- On a corner lot, the rear yard is the area furthest from the front lot line. The front lot line is usually the narrowest street frontage.
- On a corner lot, the side yard setback from the flanking street will be the same as for the main house.
- On a double-fronted lot (“through lot”), there is technically no rear yard, so a laneway home should be located behind the main residence.
- If a lot is near a street/lane intersection, the regulations to maintain vision clearance at intersections may impact the siting of a laneway home (Zoning Bylaw section 6.13).
- An unsprinklered laneway home may not be located further than 45 m (147.64 ft.) from a lot line abutting a road.

Lot Coverage:
- 45% maximum for buildings/structures
- 70% maximum for impervious surfaces

Parking:
- Required parking:
  - 1 parking space will be required on the property. This must be uncovered or in a carport and meet the City standard for a van accessible parking space (Zoning Bylaw Section 800.3.1).

Additional considerations:
- The parking space may be located within the side yard setback, subject to vision clearance at intersection regulations (Zoning Bylaw section 6.13).
- The parking area must include an energized outlet capable of providing Level 2 charging for an electric vehicle.
- Additional parking spaces may be provided on the property but will not be required. These may be uncovered, in a carport, or in a garage.
- Parking/storage for bikes, strollers, etc. may be provided in detached accessory buildings, attached “bikeports,” or bike lockers.

Environmental Design:
- Laneway homes must meet BC Energy Step Code Level 3.
- An additional 0.5 m (1.64 ft.) in height may be permitted to support BC Energy Step Code 5 or BC Zero Carbon Step Code buildings.

Outdoor Space:
- Trees must be retained or replaced as per the Burnaby Tree Bylaw.
- Private outdoor space for the laneway home will be encouraged: a minimum 4 m2 (43.06 sq. ft.) private patio or minimum 3 m2 (32.29 sq. ft.) deck or balcony.

Access/Addressing:
- A minimum 0.9 m (3 ft.) wide pathway is required from the street to the laneway home.
- “L” suffixes will be added to the main address to identify laneway homes (e.g. L1–1234 Main Street).

Servicing & Utilities:
- Separate sewer, water, and power services will be required for the laneway home.
- An annual supplementary utility fee will be charged for a laneway home.

Application Process:
- A building permit will be required to construct a laneway home.
- A “How-To” guide will be provided to assist with the application process.
- A pre-approved design library will be created to accompany the program.

Heritage:
- Exceptions to these regulations may be considered to preserve heritage buildings, through the Heritage Revitalization Agreement process.

SECONDARY SUITES IN SEMI-DETACHED HOMES | FINAL PROGRAM FOR PHASE 1A

Zoning Districts:
- Permitted in R4, R5, R6, R12, and RM6 Districts
- Due to fire separation requirements, secondary suites will not be permitted in up/down duplexes, where dwelling units are above or below other dwelling units.

Eligible Lots:
To add a semi-detached home in the R4, R5, R6, or RM6 Districts, a lot must be at least:
- 557.4 m2 (6,000 sq. ft.) and 15.0 m (49.2 ft.) wide.
To add a semi-detached home in the R12 District, a lot must be at least:
- 306.57 m2 (3,300 sq. ft.) and 9.15 m (30 ft.) wide on lots with lanes, or
- 306.57 m2 (3,300 sq. ft.) and 13.7 m (45 ft.) wide on lots without lanes.
To add secondary suites to a semi-detached home, an eligible lot must have:
- A semi-detached home (two attached units placed side-by-side or front-to-back).
- Vehicular access to the rear yard from the side or rear of the property, via an open lane or residential street.

Units per Lot:
- Eligible lots may have up to 4 units.

Ownership:
- A semi-detached home may be stratified into two “primary” units (each side may be sold separately). However, a secondary suite may not be separately stratified (sold separately) from a primary unit.
- A secondary suite may be rented out as a long-term rental unit. Short-term rentals will not be permitted in secondary suites.
- The owner will not be required to live on the property. If the owner lives off-site, an annual house rental business license will be required.

Floor Area:
- Maximum floor area for a secondary suite:
  - There is no maximum floor area for a secondary suite, subject to the following:
    - the secondary suite must be contained within a semi-detached unit; and
    - a floor containing a secondary suite can be no greater in area than the storey next above or below it.
- The floor area of a secondary suite will not count toward the total floor area permitted for the semi-detached home.
- Ground level suites and basements containing secondary suites may be added to a two-storey semi-detached home.
- Minimum floor area for a secondary suite:
  - 32.52 m2 (350 sq. ft.)

Additional Considerations:
- A “ground level suite” means a suite at or below ground level with an accessible path to the front door that is certified as meeting universal design standards.
- The top floor of a semi-detached home has no maximum size but must be at least one third of the permitted above grade floor area.

Height:
- Maximum height for a semi-detached home with a secondary suite other than a ground level suite:
  - Two storeys plus basement; and
  - Up to 9.0 m (29.5 ft.) for a sloping roof or 7.4 m (24.3 ft.) for a flat roof.
- Maximum height for a semi-detached home with a ground level suite:
  - Two storeys plus ground level suite; and
  - Up to 10.5m (34.4 ft.) for a sloping roof, or 8.9m (29.2 ft.) for a flat roof.

Setbacks:
- Setbacks for semi-detached homes will be as per existing Zoning Bylaw regulations.

Lot Coverage:
- Lot coverage for semi-detached homes will be as per existing Zoning Bylaw regulations.
- 70% maximum for impervious surfaces.

Parking:
Required parking:
- 2 parking spaces will be required on the property (one per side of the semi-detached home). These must be uncovered or in a carport.
- Parking spaces for suites must meet the City standard for an accessible parking space.
- Parking spaces for ground level suites should meet the City standard for a van accessible parking space.

Additional considerations:
- Each parking space must include an energized outlet capable of providing Level 2 charging for an electric vehicle.
- Additional (unrequired) parking spaces may be included on the site and may be uncovered, in a carport, or in a garage.

Environmental Design:
- Step 3 of the BC Energy Step Code will need to be met for newly constructed semi-detached homes with secondary suites.

Outdoor Space:
- A minimum 4 m2 (43.06 sq. ft.) of private outdoor space per suite is encouraged.
- The protection and/or provision of trees as per the Burnaby Tree Bylaw.

Access/Addressing:
- “S” suffixes will be added to the main address to identify secondary suites (e.g. S1–1234 Main Street).

Servicing & Utilities:
- Servicing for secondary suites in semi-detached homes will be as per secondary suites in single-family homes.
- An annual supplementary utility fee will be charged for each secondary suite that is rented out.

Application Process:
- A building permit will be required to construct a suite in a semi-detached home.
- A “How-To” guide will be provided to assist with the application process.
- A pre-approved design library will be created to accompany the program.

Required parking must be accessed from a lane or, subject to the approval of the General Manager Engineering, a side or rear street.

NOTES:
- Housing Choices Phase 1b is launching summer 2023 and may result in updates to the requirements described above once implemented in 2024.
- Laneway homes in Agricultural (A) zoning districts are being considered separately as part of an agricultural lands review starting in 2023.
- Additional information is available on the project website: Burnaby.ca/HousingChoices

Meeting june 19, 2023
file: 41500 20
council report
to: mayor & council
from: general manager planning and development
subject: housing choices final program for phase 1a and
scope for phase 1b
purpose: to obtain council approval for the final program for housing choices
phase 1a, and the scope and schedule for phase 1b.
Recommendations
1. That the final program for housing choices phase 1a, to permit laneway homes
and secondary suites in semi-detached homes on properties with lanes, and on
corner lots and through lots, in burnabys single and two family neighbourhoods, be
approved;
that staff is directed to bring forward a report outlining the bylaw amendments
required to implement the final program for housing choices phase 1a, concurrently
with the necessary amendment bylaw.
2. That the proposed scope and schedule for housing choices phase 1b, to permit
laneway homes and secondary suites in semi-detached homes on properties without
lanes, and additional housing types with three or four units on all properties in single
and two family neighbourhoods, be approved; and
that staff be authorized to prepare a report outlining tools for retention of heritage
resources in single and two family neighbourhoods.
Chief administrative officers comments
i concur with the recommendation of the general manager planning and development.
Executive summary
this report seeks council approval for the final program for laneway homes and suites
in semi-detached homes on properties with lanes. It also seeks council approval on the
scope and schedule for the next phase of the housing choices program, to expand lot
eligibility to properties without lanes, as well as introducing other forms of housing to
single and two family neighbourhoods.
1.0 policy section
the housing choices program generally aligns with the following council adopted
plans, reports and policies: corporate strategic plan (2022), official community plan
(1998), home: burnabys housing and homelessness strategy (2021), burnabys
attachment 2
subject: housing choices final program for phase 1a and scope for phase 1b
open council meeting june 19, 2023........................................... Page 2
housing needs report (2021), and the mayors task force on community housing
final report (2019).
2.0 background
housing choices is a city program to introduce more housing variety to burnabys
single and two-family neighbourhoods. The program was set up to implement one of the
actions from burnabys 10-year housing action plan (home: burnabys housing and
homelessness strategy), adopted by council on december 6, 2021.
On february 27, 2023, council approved the draft program for phase 1a of housing
choices. Phase 1a focuses on permitting laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes on single and two-family properties with lanes. In march and april 2023, staff
shared the draft program with the public. The feedback received has been considered in
preparing the recommended final program for phase 1a, which is presented in section
3.1 of this report.
When the housing choices program was first launched in february 2022, council
requested that staff expand phase 1 to include additional small-scale housing types in
advance of the official community plan update. These additional housing types will be
introduced in phase 1b. A proposed scope of work and schedule for phase 1b of
housing choices is presented in section 3.2 of this report.
3.0 general information
3.1 phase 1a: laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes
phase 1a: program update
the draft program for phase 1a was approved by council on february 27, 2023, and
presented to the public in open houses in march 2023. Following public consultation,
several changes are being recommended to the draft program, to improve livability
and make it easier to build these types of housing. These changes are outlined
below.
Changes to the draft program:
lot eligibility: reducing the minimum lot width and area required to build a semidetached home or duplex in the r4 and r5 zoning districts. This will enable
more properties in two-family zones to build semi-detached and duplex homes.
Semi-detached floor area: removing the restrictions on floor area that were
previously applied to the top storey of a two-storey semi-detached home. This will
make it easier to provide upstairs bedrooms in semi-detached homes.
Semi-detached ground level suites: changing accessible basement suites
in semi-detached homes to ground level suites that meet the saferhomes
universal design standard. The elevation of these suites to ground level will allow
for greater accessibility and livability. Universal design focuses on creating
barrier-free living spaces for all ages and abilities.
Subject: housing choices final program for phase 1a and scope for phase 1b
open council meeting june 19, 2023........................................... Page 3
removing cellars: prohibiting cellars in laneway homes and semi-detached
homes. Basements will be permitted (as shown in the draft program) but cellars
will not be permitted. The difference between a cellar and a basement is that a
basement has more of its height above ground (a basement has more than 50%
of its height above ground whereas a cellar has more than 50% of its height
below ground). Basements are preferred over cellars as they provide more light
and livable space for occupants.
Laneway home minimum size: increasing the minimum size of a laneway
home to 32.52 m2 (350 sq. Ft. ). This change is to increase livability and align with
concurrent proposed changes to minimum unit sizes in burnaby.
Laneway home height: changing the building height calculation method. The
height of a laneway home will be measured from the lowest point on the
perimeter of the laneway home. The lowest point will be the lower of the natural
or finished grade. This will reduce the potential height of a laneway home on
sloping lots and will help to protect views.
Laneway home fire access: adding a maximum distance from a street for
siting laneway homes without sprinkler systems. Laneway homes without
sprinkler systems must be located within 45 metres of a street. This will better
support fire safety and access, as fire hoses have a limited reach from the fire
truck.
Bike storage: removing the proposed below-height bike locker floor area
exemption. Instead, bike storage sheds may be added under the current
regulations as an accessory building. The floor area of an accessory building will
not count towards the floor area of the laneway home or the principal home. Bike
storage within a carport or a smaller bikeport will also be encouraged and will
not be counted as floor area.
Phase 1a: final program
the final program for phase 1a is presented in (attachment 1). This includes all of
the recommended changes outlined above.
Phase 1a: next steps
if the final program for phase 1a, as presented in (attachment 1), is approved by
council, the bylaw amendments required to support the program will be advanced to
council in july, with the opportunity for final adoption at the subsequent council
meeting in late august. Shortly after final adoption, eligible property owners will be
able to apply for a building permit to build laneway homes and suites in semidetached homes.
3.2 phase 1b: additional housing types for all single and two family lots
phase 1b: program update
phase 1b will expand eligibility for laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes to properties without lanes, as well as permit additional housing forms with
three or four units on single and two family lots.
Subject: housing choices final program for phase 1a and scope for phase 1b
open council meeting june 19, 2023........................................... Page 4
in april 2023, the bc government announced a homes for people (hfp) plan that
includes proposals to loosen zoning restrictions in single and two family lots across
the province. This may mean permitting up to three or four dwelling units on all
single and two family lots, depending on the lot type, and potentially more units in
locations that are close to transit. These proposals have the potential to align well
with phase 1b of the housing choices program. Additional details are anticipated
from the province in the fall. At that time, where feasible, provincial legislation will be
incorporated into the planning process for phase 1b.
Phase 1b: scope
the proposed scope for phase 1b includes the following items:
permitting laneway homes on properties without lanes;
permitting suites in semi-detached homes on properties without lanes;
permitting additional configurations for three or four units on single and twofamily lots, with or without lanes. These may include permitting:
o single-family homes with two suites;
o duplexes and semi-detached homes in more zone districts and on smaller lots;
o triplexes;
o fourplexes;
o cottage courts (3 or 4 detached units on a lot);
o duplex and semi-detached laneway homes; and
o secondary suites in the above housing forms.
Considering the appropriate mix of strata and rental housing units;
considering new incentives for properties on the heritage inventory to encourage
retention of heritage buildings;
responding to anticipated provincial legislation which may require permitting
additional units on eligible properties near frequent transit; and
making minor revisions to phase 1a regulations, if required. These will respond to
feedback from the initial intake of building permits for laneway homes and suites
in semi-detached homes.
Phase 1b: schedule
the proposed schedule for phase 1b is as follows:
june 2023 seek council approval of phase 1b scope and schedule (this report)
july/aug 2023 conduct a public survey on housing types for phase 1b
sept 2023 incorporate provincial housing legislation (if available)
oct/nov 2023 set out the draft program for phase 1b
dec/jan 2023 consult with the public on the draft program for phase 1b
feb 2024 seek council approval on the final program for phase 1b
march 2024 amend city bylaws to implement the final program for phase 1b
phase 1b: next steps
subject: housing choices final program for phase 1a and scope for phase 1b
open council meeting june 19, 2023........................................... Page 5
if the scope and schedule for phase 1b are approved by council as recommended
in this report, staff will immediately start this work. The first step will be to launch a
public survey on the housing types for phase 1b. This survey will be made available
to the public over the summer.
3.3 housing choices: retention of heritage resources
the final program recommended for phase 1a, and introduction of additional
housing options in phase 1b, has implications for the retention of heritage homes.
Local governments in bc can provide incentives to property owners to protect a
heritage resource, including entering into heritage revitalization agreements
(hras). Hras provide for variances to the zoning bylaw in consideration of
retention, conservation, and designation of heritage building. The city maintains an
inventory of heritage resources considered to have heritage value and potential
eligibility for an hra. This heritage inventory is updated as resources are protected
or demolished.
Excluding city-owned properties, there are currently 90 heritage resources listed in
the inventory. Of those, 61 are buildings located in r residential zone districts. 25 of
those 61 buildings are located in r4 and r5 districts and do not meet the current
zoning bylaw requirements for a two-family home. However, with the reduction in
minimum lot size for two-family homes, which is recommended for the phase 1a
program, these 25 lots could redevelop with a semi-detached home with two
secondary suites.
The proposed change would provide an incentive for the owners of these 25
properties to redevelop their lot to maximize the permitted density. The city is
currently losing more homes on the heritage inventory to demolition than are being
retained through hras. Since january 2021, three privately owned residential
heritage resources have received demolition permits. Only two applications for
retention of residential heritage resources through an hra were advanced to
council during the same period.
Staff are currently completing a review of the citys heritage policies and programs,
including the citys use of tools available under the local government act for
retention of heritage resources. The intent of the review is to inform the policy
recommendations of the official community plan (ocp) update. However, as
housing policy updates are being made in advance of the ocp update, it is
recommended that council authorize staff to prepare a report outlining tools that the
city could implement to retain heritage resources in residential neighbourhoods
concurrent to advancing the housing choices program.
4.0 communication and community engagement
community engagement for the housing choices program began in spring 2022. A
dedicated project webpage was established at that time. As of may 15, 2023, the project
webpage has been accessed 27,220 times, by a total of 17,402 users.
Subject: housing choices final program for phase 1a and scope for phase 1b
open council meeting june 19, 2023........................................... Page 6
phase 1a included three rounds of community engagement and directly involved over
4,000 people. Events included two public surveys, three virtual workshops, one inperson workshop and three open houses. A summary of what we heard was provided in
reports to council on may 30, 2022 and february 27, 2023. A final round of engagement
was held in spring 2023 to present the draft program to the public before finalizing the
details. A summary of what we heard is presented in (attachment 2).
Engagement for phase 1b will begin with a survey on the housing types and forms that
are being considered for this phase. Information collected from this survey will be
considered in conjunction with the anticipated provincial housing legislation to develop a
draft program for phase 1b.
5.0 financial considerations
as more housing units are introduced to burnabys neighbourhoods through the
housing choices program, there will be costs to upgrade lane infrastructure and provide
ongoing servicing. Supplementary annual utility fees will be levied to pay for annual
sewer, water and garbage collection services. Additional information on servicing
upgrade costs and utility fees is provided in (attachment 1).
Funding for infrastructure and policy development to support new housing units created
through the housing choices program may be available through the canada mortgage
and housing corporation (cmhc) housing accelerator fund (haf). Cmhc has
identified burnaby as a growth leader within the large/urban stream and the city will be
submitting its haf application in advance of the summer intake.
Respectfully submitted,
e. W. Kozak, general manager planning and development
attachments
attachment 1 housing choices phase 1a: final program
attachment 2 housing choices phase 1a: summary of feedback on the draft program
report contributors
this report was prepared by sarah crawford, planner 2, and reviewed by lily ford,
planner 3, carl isaak, director community planning, and lee-ann garnett, deputy
general manager planning and development.
Attachment 1. Phase 1a: final program
this attachment provides details of the final program for housing choices: phase 1a, to
introduce laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes to single and two family
properties on lanes in burnaby.
A how-to guide will be prepared to assist residents in understanding these
regulations. A frequently asked questions (faq) section is also available on the housing
choices website (www. Burnaby. Ca/housingchoices). Any questions may be directed to
housingchoices@burnaby. Ca.
Details of the final program are provided in the following sections:
1.0 laneway homes
2.0 suites in semi-detached homes
3.0 additional information
1.0 laneway homes
final program for phase 1a: laneway homes
zoning
districts
r1, r2, r3, r4, r5, r6, r9, r10, r11, r12 and rm6.
Eligible lots eligible lots must have:
a single-family home; and
vehicular access to the rear yard from the side or rear of the property, via an open lane or
residential street.
Notes:
1. Corner lots or double frontage lots (through lots) that do not have access to an open
lane will require access approval from the engineering department.
2. If a lot is near a stream, streamside protection and enhancement area regulations may
limit the ability to construct a laneway home. (see section 6.23 of the zoning bylaw)
units per lot eligible lots may have up to 3 units. These may include a single family home with a
secondary suite, and a laneway home.
Tenure a lot with a laneway home must remain under a single title. This means that a laneway
home cannot be stratified or otherwise subdivided, and cannot be sold separately from
the main home.
A laneway home may be rented out as a long term rental unit. Short term rentals will not
be permitted in laneway homes.
The owner will not be required to live on the property. If the owner lives off-site, an annual
house rental business license will be required. Only one license will be required per lot.
Floor area maximum floor area for a laneway home:
up to 20% of the lot area, but no larger than 140 m2 (1,507 sq. Ft. ).
Minimum floor area for a laneway home:
32.52 m2 (350 sq. Ft. )
notes:
1. The floor area calculation for a laneway home will exclude:
floor area of the principal dwelling
floor area of carports that are attached to the laneway home
floor area of any accessory buildings that are not attached to the laneway home (e. G.
Garages, sheds, workshops, bike sheds/lockers)
height maximum height for a laneway home:
no more than 2 storeys; and
up to 7.6 m (24.9 ft. ) for a sloping roof; or
up to 6.7 m (22 ft. ) for a flat roof.
Notes:
1. The height of a laneway home will be measured from the lowest point on the perimeter of
the laneway home. The lowest point will be the lower of the natural or finished grade.
2. A laneway home cannot exceed the maximum height permitted for the principal dwelling,
as provided in the zoning bylaw.
3. Basements are permitted in laneway homes and will count as one storey.
Location on
the lot
a laneway home must be located in the rear yard.
Minimum setbacks for the laneway home:
2.4 m (7.87 ft. ) from the main house
2.4 m (7.87 ft. ) from a detached garage or other accessory building
1.2 m (3.94 ft. ) from the rear lot line
1.2 m (3.94 ft. ) from the side lot line
notes:
1. On a corner lot, the rear yard is the area furthest from the front lot line. The front lot line is
usually the narrowest street frontage.
2. On a corner lot, the side yard setback from the flanking street will be the same as for the
main house.
3. On a double-fronted lot (also called a through lot) there is technically no rear yard, so a
laneway home should be located behind the main residence.
4. If a lot is near a street/lane intersection, the regulations to maintain vision clearance at
intersections may impact the siting of a laneway home (zoning bylaw section 6.13).
5. An unsprinklered laneway home may not be located further than 45m (147.64 ft. ) from a
lot line abutting a road.
Lot coverage 45% maximum for buildings/structures
70% maximum for impervious surfaces
parking 1 parking space will be required on the property. This must be uncovered or in a carport,
and meet the city standard for a van accessible parking space.
Notes:
1. The parking space may be located within the side yard setback, subject to vision
clearance at intersection regulations (zoning bylaw section 6.13).
2. The parking area must include an energized outlet capable of providing level 2 charging
for an electric vehicle.
3. Additional parking spaces may be provided on the property but will not be required.
These may be uncovered, in a carport, or in a garage.
4. Parking/storage for bikes, strollers etc. May be provided in detached accessory buildings,
attached bikeports or bike lockers.
Environmental
design
laneway homes must meet bc energy step code level 3
notes:
1. Laneway homes are considered part 9 residential buildings under the bc building code.
As of may 1, 2023, step code level 3 is the new provincial standard for all part 9
buildings.
2. An additional 0.5 m (1.64 ft. ) in height may be permitted to support passive house, net
zero, or bc energy step code 5 buildings.
Outdoor
space
trees must be retained or replaced as per the burnaby tree bylaw. Additional
information is provided in section 3.0 of this attachment.
Private outdoor space for the laneway home will be encouraged: a minimum 4 m2 (43.06
sq. Ft. ) private patio or minimum 3 m2 (32.29 sq. Ft. ) deck or balcony.
Access/
addressing
a minimum 0.9m (3 ft. ) wide pathway is required from the street to the laneway home.
An apartment-style address will be added to the main address to identify laneway homes
(e. G. L1-1234 main street).
Servicing and
utilities
separate sewer, water and power services.
An annual supplementary utility fee will be charged for a laneway home. Additional
information is provided in section 3.0 of this attachment.
Application
process
building permit
a how-to guide will be provided to assist with building permit applications.
A preapproved design library will be set up to accompany the program. Additional
information is provided in section 3.0 of this attachment.
Heritage exceptions to these regulations may be considered to preserve heritage buildings, through
the heritage revitalization agreement process.
2.0 suites in semi-detached homes
final program for phase 1a: suites in semi-detached homes
zoning districts r4, r5, r6, r12 and rm6.
Eligible lots to add a semi-detached home in the r4, r5, r6 or rm6 districts a lot must be at least:
557.4 m2 (6,000 sq. Ft. ) and 15.0 m (49.2 ft. ) wide.
To add a semi-detached home in the r12 district a lot must be at least:
306.57 m2 (3,300 sq. Ft. ) and 9.15 m (30 ft. ) wide on lots with lanes, or
306.57 m2 (3,300 sq. Ft. ) and 13.7 m (45 ft. ) wide on lot without lanes.
To add secondary suites to a semi-detached home, an eligible lot must have:
a semi-detached home (two attached units placed side-by-side or front-to-back).
Vehicular access to the rear yard from the side or rear of the property, via an open lane
or residential street.
Maximum
dwelling units
per property
eligible lots may have up to 4 units: two semi-detached units, each with one secondary suite
per unit.
Ownership a semi-detached home may be stratified into two primary units (each side may be sold
separately). However, a secondary suite may not be separately stratified (sold
separately) from a primary unit.
A secondary suite may be rented out as a long term rental unit. Short term rentals will
not be permitted in secondary suites.
The owner will not be required to live on the property. If the owner lives off-site, an
annual house rental business license will be required.
Floor area maximum floor area for a secondary suite:
there will be no maximum floor area for a secondary suite, but it must be contained
within a semi-detached unit.
Ground level suites, and basements containing secondary suites, may be added to a
two-storey semi-detached home. The floor area of the secondary suite will not count
toward the total floor area permitted for the semi-detached home.
Minimum floor area for a secondary suite:
32.52 m2 (350 sq. Ft. )
notes:
1. A ground level suite means a suite at or below ground level with an accessible path to
the front door that is certified as meeting universal design standards. See additional
details in section 3.0.
2. The floor area of a basement or ground level suite must be no greater than the floor area
of the storey above.
3. The top floor of a semi-detached home has no maximum size, but must be at least one
third of the permitted above grade floor area.
Maximum
height
semi-detached homes that include a suite:
two storeys plus basement; and
up to 9.0 m (29.5 ft. ) for a sloping roof or 7.4 m (24.3 ft. ) for a flat roof.
Semi-detached homes that include a ground level suite:
two storeys plus ground level suite; and
up to 10.5m (34.4 ft. ) for a sloping roof, or 8.9m (29.2 ft. ) for a flat roof.
Setbacks setbacks for semi-detached homes will be as per existing zoning bylaw regulations.
Lot coverage as per existing zoning bylaw regulations
70% maximum for impervious surfaces
parking 2 parking spaces will be required on the property (one per side of the semi-detached
home). These must be uncovered or in a carport.
Parking spaces for suites must meet the city standard for an accessible parking space.
Parking spaces for ground level suites should meet the city standard for a van
accessible parking space.
Environmental
design
step code level 3
outdoor space as per the burnaby tree bylaw. Additional information is provided in section 3.0 of this
attachment.
Private outdoor space for each suite will be encouraged: minimum 4 m2 (43.06 sq. Ft. ).
Access/
addressing
s suffixes will be added to the main address to identify secondary suites. (e. G. S1- 1234 main
street).
Servicing and
utilities
servicing for secondary suites in semi-detached homes will be as per secondary suites
in single-family homes.
An annual supplementary utility fee will be charged for each secondary suite that is
rented out. Additional information is provided in section 3 of this attachment.
Application
process
building permit
a how-to guide will be provided to assist with the application process.
A pre-approved design library will be set up to accompany the program. Additional
information is provided in section 3.0 of this attachment.
3.0 additional information
this section provides additional details for implementing phase 1a of the housing
choices program. This includes:
1. Infrastructure upgrades
2. Trees and green space
3. Universal design standards
4. Pre-approved designs
5. Supplementary utility fees
1. Infrastructure upgrades
as laneway homes have their main access facing the back lane of the property, careful
assessment of lane conditions and standards must be incorporated to ensure the
infrastructure associated with these housing types meet the appropriate levels of
service.
Lane infrastructure may include upgrading to formal drainage systems (storm sewers,
catch basins, etc. ) rather than ditches with driveway culverts, pavement rehabilitation
and surface works such as full width lane paving, curbs, as well concrete letdowns on
either side of the lane. Consideration must also be given to proper lighting, garbage
collection, and pedestrian and vehicular movements in the lane.
Based on historical construction costs, it is estimated that lane upgrades would be in the
range of $2,000 to $3,000 per linear metre. It is important to note that these costs do
not include other features to address site specific conditions such as fencing, steepness
and grade differentials requiring structural walls between the property and the lane,
and/or other environmental factors.
2. Protecting trees and green space
as the housing choices program progresses, protection of burnabys trees will be
challenging. The tree bylaw is currently being reviewed and this is expected to be
completed by the end of this year. However, under current legislation (bc community
charter) the tree bylaw cannot prevent development of a lot in accordance with the
density allowed under the zoning bylaw.
The final program for phase 1a includes minimal setbacks and lowered parking
requirements to maximize the options for locating buildings, and make it easier to retain
existing trees. Reductions to front setbacks are also being considered for phase 1b
which will provide additional options for building placement. The existing maximum lot
coverage requirement of 45% has been retained to try to protect greenspace, tree roots
and manage stormwater runoff. The impervious surface maximum of 70% is also
retained.
The tree bylaw can be used to require fees, tree-cutting permits and replacement trees
or contributions to the civic tree reserve fund for planting new trees on public lands.
As part of the review, options are being considered to maintain the goal of no net loss of
trees, and if possible, net gain, via replacement tree planting.
3. Universal design standard
semi-detached homes containing suites that meet a universal design standard will be
provided with additional height to elevate these suites to ground level. This will result in
a three-level home where all of the living space is fully above ground. The objective is to
encourage the development of more rental suites in the city that can be used to the
greatest extent possible, regardless of age, size, ability or disability.
Universal design is a set of features, principles and strategies that can be incorporated
into the design and construction of a home, to allow it to be adapted easily and costeffectively to keep pace with changing needs. Universally designed houses allow their
occupants to live safely, comfortably and independently in their home as they age,
without the need for any costly upgrades or renovations. (cmhc information on the
saferhome standard, 2017).
To demonstrate that a suite has been built to a universal design standard, applicants will
be asked to provide certification from the saferhome standards society as part of the
building permit process. This standard is used by bc housing and has been
recommended by the rick hansen foundation. The saferhome standards society
keeps a registry of all of the units that have been certified as meeting the universal
design standard in bc, including laneway homes and secondary suites. This will be
useful in tracking rental units in burnaby that have been built to a universal design
standards. See www. Saferhomestandards. Com for additional details on this standard.
4. Pre-approved designs
a pre-approved design library will be set up to accompany the program. Plans for
laneway homes or semi-detached homes with suites that have been permitted by the
city, and that meet key city policy objectives, and/or demonstrate best practices will be
added to a public design library following occupancy, and be available for purchase from
the designer. Examples of key objectives are universal design standards, or higher
levels of the bc energy step code or zero carbon step code.
Building permit applications that use designs from the preapproved design library may
receive faster approval than other designs.
5. Supplementary utility fees
i) laneway homes
utility charges for laneway homes will be levied as follows:
if there is an existing flat rate service for the primary residential property,
waterworks and sanitary sewer utility fees will be levied for the laneway home upon
receipt of an occupancy permit for the laneway home:
o utility fees for the laneway home will be charged for the calendar year,
less the portion of the year before the laneway home occupancy permit
was issued;
o an additional utility notice will be issued to the property owner to reflect
the laneway home;
o ongoing fees will be applied annually, and issued each january to the
property owner on the annual utility notice;
o service disconnection: no adjustment will be made to utility fees for a
period of 28 days following receipt of the disconnection request or notice
of issuance of a demolition permit.
If there is no existing flat rate service for the property, waterworks and sanitary
sewer utility charges will be levied for the property in two parts:
o utility fees for the main house will be charged for the calendar year, less
the portion of the year before the building permit for the main house was
issued;
o utility fees for the laneway home will be charged for the calendar year,
less the portion of the year before the laneway home occupancy permit
home was issued;
o additional utility notices will be issued to the property owner to reflect each
change in status;
o ongoing fees are applied annually, and issued each january to the
property owner on the annual utility notice;
o service disconnection: no adjustment will be made to utility fees for a
period of 28 days following receipt of the disconnection request or notice
of issuance of a demolition permit.
Utility rates water and sewer:
utility rates for a laneway home will match the rates listed in the citys
consolidated fees bylaw for single family dwellings with a rental suite.
Charges will be levied on a per unit basis
single family dwelling laneway
home example based on
current 2023 rental suite rates
paid by march 15 paid after march
15
laneway home water $309.86 $326.17
laneway home - sewer $293.80 $308.45
combined $602.89 $634.62
utility rates garbage
property owners will not be required to add a new container;
however, owners will be asked to upsize to a 360 litre receptacle before
obtaining an additional container for the laneway home;
standard residential garbage rates will apply, based on the size of container
provided;
garbage will be billed annually to the property owner in january as part of the
utility notice;
garbage fees are not pro-rated during the year. Any changes will be in effect
from january 1 of the next calendar year.
Ii) suites in semi-detached homes
utility charges for suites in semi-detached homes will follow the process that is
currently in place for suites in single-family homes.
Property owners will only be charged supplementary utility fees if their suite(s)
are rented;
owners will be required to submit a supplementary utility fees declaration form to
declare the rental status of each suite.
Utility rates for water and sewer:
rates for suites in semi-detached homes are currently listed in the citys
consolidated fees bylaw, under rented suite in a two family dwelling.
Charges will be levied on a per unit basis.
Suite in a two family dwelling
example based on current 2023
rental suite rates
paid by march 15 paid after march
15
suite water $232.37 $244.60
suite - sewer $219.22 $230.76
combined $451.59 $475.36
utility rates for garbage:
property owners will not be not required to add a new container;
property owners may have one toter per side of a semi-detached home, to a
maximum of 360 litres;
standard residential garbage rates will apply, based on the size of container
provided;
garbage is billed annually to the property owner in january as part of the utility
notice;
garbage fees are not pro-rated during the year. Any changes will be in effect
from january 1 of the next calendar year.
Attachment 2:
housing choices phase 1a: summary of feedback on the draft
program
1.0 introduction
this report provides a summary of feedback from engagement on the draft program for housing
choices phase 1a. This phase focuses on introducing laneway homes and secondary suites in
semi-detached homes to burnabys single and two family properties on lanes.
This was the third and final round of public engagement for phase 1a of the housing choices
program. The objectives of this engagement were to check in with the public on the draft
regulations, to raise awareness of the draft regulations, and to provide an opportunity to collect
any final feedback before the program was finalized.
2.0 engagement summary
feedback on the draft program was collected through a public survey and two open houses.
Public survey: a public survey was available on the city of burnaby website from march 27
until april 10, , 2023. The survey was advertised through newspaper advertisements, social
media (facebook, twitter, instagram), at the open houses and via email to residents who had
signed up to receive updates on the project. There were a total of 276 responses to the survey.
Respondents were able to answer sections on the proposed regulations for laneway homes,
suites in semi-detached homes, or both. 91 respondents only answered the section on laneway
homes, 7 respondents only answered the section on suites in semi-detached homes, and 177
respondents answered both sections.
Open houses: the city hosted two open houses on the draft program. The first was held on
march 28, 2023 at the confederation senior centre. The second was held at the bonsor
recreation centre on march 29, 2023. Presentation boards explaining the draft program were
displayed and city staff were available to answer questions. The presentation boards were also
made available on the housing choices website. Over 900 people attended the open houses.
Attendees at the open houses were invited to submit written comments after reviewing the
presentation boards and discussing the program with staff. Dropboxes were provided for private
comments. Public comments could be added to the boards using sticky notes. There were 56
dropbox comments and 73 sticky notes comments received.
3.0 what we heard
feedback received on the draft program has been organized into three categories: laneway
homes, suites in semi-detached homes, and written comments on the draft program.
3.1 laneway homes
laneway homes: feedback from the survey
there were 268 responses to the laneway homes section of the survey. Respondents were
provided with information on the draft program regulations and asked to indicate their level of
support for key aspects of the draft program. The chart below summarizes the level of support
for the overall draft program, in addition to specific regulations on tenure, parking, height, size
and lot eligibility.
*note: there were 265 individuals that chose to answer these questions in the survey. This chart
only includes those who answered these questions.
There was a majority of support for all of the key elements of the draft program. The highest
level of support was for the regulations regarding lot eligibility for phase 1a housing types, with
78% either strongly supporting or somewhat supporting this regulation. The lowest level of
support was for the regulations for parking, with 63% either strongly supporting or somewhat
supporting the draft program regulations. Support for height, size and tenure regulations for
laneway homes received 74%, 73% and 69% respectively.
Respondents were also asked to indicate their level of overall support for the draft program for
laneway homes. 77% of respondents stated that they strongly supported or somewhat
supported the overall program.
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
eligible lots
size
height
parking
tenure
overall
laneway homes draft program*
strongly support somewhat support neutral somewhat oppose strongly oppose
3.2 suites in semi-detached homes
suites in semi-detached homes: feedback from the survey
there were 184 responses to the suites in semi-detached homes section of the survey.
Respondents were asked to indicate their level of support for key aspects of the draft program.
The chart below summarizes the level of support for the overall draft program, in addition to
specific regulations on tenure, parking, suite size and lot eligibility.
*note: there were 180 individuals that chose to answer these questions in the survey. The chart
only includes those who answered these questions.
There was a majority of support for all of the key elements of the draft program. The highest
level of support was for the regulations regarding the size of secondary suites, with 79% either
strongly supporting or somewhat supporting this regulation. The lowest level of support was for
the regulations for parking, with 60% either strongly supporting or somewhat supporting the
draft program. Support for regulations on tenure and lot eligibility for suites in semi-detached
homes received 78% and 76% respectively.
Respondents were also asked to indicate their overall level of support for the draft program for
suites in semi-detached homes. 74% of respondents stated that they strongly supported or
somewhat supported the overall program.
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
eligible lots
size
parking
tenure
overall
suites in semis draft program*
strongly support somewhat support neutral somewhat oppose strongly oppose
3.3 written comments
survey respondents were invited to provide additional comments on the draft program for
laneway homes. Comments were not mandatory. Comments from the survey were combined
with written comments that were posted in drop boxes at the open houses, or added to the
presentation boards.
Some people submitted multiple comments, or single comments referencing different aspects of
the program. Many of the comments were general in nature, relating to the overall program and
process. These comments are reflected in the quantitative data. Comments on the regulations
were summarized and categorized by subject matter, and then analyzed by frequency. There
were 428 comments in total. Comments on the regulations that were received four or more
times are shown in the table below.
# summary of comments on program elements frequency
1 more parking should be required on the property 45
2 less/no parking should be required on the property 24
3 allow on lots without rear lanes 22
4 homes should be bigger 18
5 stratification should be allowed 15
6 costs/housing is too expensive 14
7 allow duplexes on smaller lots 13
8 living space should be above ground 13
9 attached garages should not count in size calculation 9
10 do not allow short term rentals 6
11 homes should be taller 6
12 more lot coverage should be allowed 6
13 owners should live on-site 6
14 views should be protected 6
15 homes should be lower in height 5
16 minimum suite size is too small 5
17 allow laneway homes on duplex lots 4
18 allow short term rentals 4
19 homes should be smaller 4
20 support for pre-approved plans 4
parking was one of the most common topics, with mixed opinions over how much parking
should be required on a property. Some people mentioned that lower parking should be
required near transit. Others asked that attached garages be excluded from the laneway home
floor area calculation.
Other common topics were the size and height of homes and suites, with some commenters
stating that they should be bigger and others concerned about the size and height and potential
impact on views. Some commenters suggested permitting more lot coverage to allow a larger
building footprint. Some commented that the minimum suite size was too small. Others noted
that more above ground living space was desirable.
There were also comments about lot eligibility, with many commenting that duplexes/semidetached homes should be allowed on smaller lots. Others commented that laneway homes
should be allowed on lots without lanes and on duplex lots.
Comments were received in support of stratification. Some people were concerned about the
high cost of housing in the city. There was mixed support for short term rentals, with some
respondents noting that owners should be required to live on site.
Finally there was some support for pre-approved plans to assist with the development process.
Next steps
the feedback received from this final check-in on phase 1a has been considered in conjunction
with the program recommendations and policy objectives, and where feasible, amendments
have been made to the draft program. This feedback will also inform future phases of the
housing choices program.

Meeting 2023 february 8
committee report
to: chair and members date: 2023 january 30
planning and development
committee
from: general manager file: 41500 20
planning and development
subject: housing choices phase la: draft program
purpose: to provide a draft program with respect to laneway homes and suites in semi
detached homes.
Recommendations:
1. That the committee receive the report entitled: housing choices program:
financial analysisfor laneway units and suites in semis (see attachment #1) and
forward it to council for information.
2. That the committee receive the report entitled: laneway homes andsuites in semi
detached homes program recommendations report (see attachment #2 ) and
forward it to council for information.
3. That the committee recommend that council approve the draft program for
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes, as described in section 6.0 and
appendixa and appendix j5, as a basis for public consultation.
Report
1.0 introduction
on 2021 december 06, council adopted home: burnaby's housing and homelessness strategy
(the homestrategy), a ten yearaction plan for housingin bumaby. The home strategyincluded
a priorityactionfor the city to launchan infillhousingprogramto introducemore housingchoices
to burnaby's single and two family neighbourhoods.
Toimplement this action, the city launchedhousingchoices, a multi-year, multi-phased program
to expand 'missing middle' housing in bumaby. Missingmiddle, in this context, refers to housing
types that fit between a single-family home and a mid-rise building in terms of building form.
Examples of these types of housing include duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, sixplexes, cottage
courts, rowhomes, townhomes and low-rise apartments. The term also refers to properties with
accessory units such as flex suites, secondary suites and laneway homes.
7
to: planning and developmentcommittee
from: generalmanager planning and development
re: housingchoicesphase la: draft program
2023january 30. Page 2
the housing choices program is being introduced in phases. The current phase (phase la) is
focusing on introducing laneway homes, and secondary suites insemi-detached homes. Phase lb
will focus on other options for adding three imits to a single-family lot, or four units to a twofamily lot. These may include single-family homes with two suites, triplexes, fourplexes orcottage
courts (agroup ofsmall homes around a shared courtyard). Phase 2 will focus on additional types
ofmissing middle housing such as rowhomes, townhomes and low-rise apartments. Phase 2 will
take place in conjunction with the official conmiunity plan update.
Thisreport provides an update on the progress ofphase la {section 3.0) and summarizesthe results
oftwo key reports, the financial analysis report {section 4.0) and the program recommendations
report {section 5.0). Italso presents the draft program for laneway homes and secondary suites in
semi-detached homes {section 6.0 andappendices a and b). Subject to council approvd, the
draft program will be presented to the public at open houses in the spring to gather additional
feedback before the program is brought backto council forfinal approval.
2.0 policy context
the housing choices program generally aligns with the following council adopted plans, reports
and policies: corporate strategic plan (2022), official community plan (1998), home:
burnaby's housing andhomelessness strategy (2021), burnaby's housing needs report (2021),
andthemayor'stask forceoncommunity housing finalreport (2019).
3.0 progress update
on2022 february 14, council approved a process for phase la ofthe housing choices program,
to introduce laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes. The tasks from this process are
shown inappendix c, along with columns showing the current status and anticipated schedule to
complete this work.
4.0 financial analysis report
in april 2022, atthe request ofcouncil, the city retained a consultant to undertake a financial
analysis for phase la, to determine the impact that laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes might have onproperty values insingle and two-family neighbourhoods.
Inthe report entitled "housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and
suites in semis" ("financial analysis report"), the key findings from thisanalysis are as
follows:
rental laneway homes
allowing rental laneway homes is unlikely to have any material impact on the value of
single family lots, as the laneway unit value will be largely offset by the cost of creating
the new unit.
Market rents are likely required inorder to make laneway home development financially
attractiveto most homeownersand builders. Lanewayhome development is unlikelyto be
viable ifrents are requiredto be set below market rent.
8
to: planning and development committee
from: general manager planning and development
re: housing choices phase la: draft program
2023january 30. Page 3
rental laneway homes do not have the financial ability to support any significant
contributions toward community amenities.
Suites in semi-detached homes
allowing rental suites in semi-detached homes will create a potential income stream that
prospective purchasers can use to help them finance a portion of the purchase price. This
will likely help some prospective purchasers who would not currently be able to afford a
semi-detached home.
Allowing rental suites in semi-detached homes will notlead to any significant increase in
semi-detached homes sales prices or increased lot values, as the value created bythe rental
suite will be offset by any reduction in the living area available to the unit owner and the
cost to create the rental suite.
The consultant was also asked to consider the impact on property values iflaneway homes were
stratified, andsold separately fi-om the main house. Key findings from this analysis were:
stratified laneway homes
strata laneway homes would bevery profitable andattractive from a financial perspective.
If permitted, it is expected thatthere would be interest from homeowners and builders in
this option.
Allowing stratalaneway homes would likely create significant upward pressure on single
family lot values, unless the city:
requires a significant amenity contribution as part of the approval for a strata
laneway home. However, the supportable contribution would vary widely
depending on the sizeof theunitandthe location of the property. In addition, many
single family homeowners may not be able to provide a significant amenity
contribution until after the strata laneway home is built and sold which would create
an obstacle to creating new homes.
Requires thenew laneway home tobesold ata below market price. The supportable
price discount would vary depending on the size of the laneway home and the
location of theproperty. This approach would require the creation of anaffordable
homeownership program aswell as ongoing administration andmonitoring bycity
staff. In addition, it would be difficult to determine "market price" if all strata
lanewayhomes are requiredto be sold at below market prices.
Stratification of laneway homes is not being considered for phase la of the housing choices
program. However, itcould beconsidered infuture phases, inconjunction with anaffordable home
ownership program. This would support strategy #6 of bumaby's housing and homelessness
strategy to ''explore ways to make home ownership more attainable'.
Acopy ofthe financial analysis report, providing details onthe methodology and findings from
this work, is qs attachment #1.
9
to: planning and development committee
from: general manager planning and development
re: housingchoicesphase la: draft program
2023january 30. Page 4
5.0 program recommendations report
the report entitled ''laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes program
recommendations report ("program recommendations report") provides 108
recommendations and 10 future considerations for the regulation of laneway homes and suitesin
semi-detached homes. Recommendations address a range offactors, including:
zoning and lot eligibility;
building size, height and siting;
parking;
environmental design;
outdoor spaces;
servicing and utilities; and
the application process.
The program recommendations report reflects the results ofabest practicesreview, planning and
policy review, financial analysis, and technical design and modelling, together with feedback
gathered from a survey and workshops undertaken with residents, small housing developers and
other housing industry professionals.
The key themes that emerged throughout this process, and that have been used as principles to
guide the program recommendations are asfollows:
flexibility- no one approach fits all;
optimization - make the bestuse ofspace andresources;
suitability - diverse needs require diverse solutions; and
expediency - make the development process easy and keep itsimple.
Asdiscussed insection 6.0below, theprogram recommendations report was a keyinput into the
developmentofthe proposed draft program.
The program recommendations report is provided asattachment #2.
6.0 draft program
during the fall, the program recommendations report was reviewed by stafffrom across the city,
whose feedback has been used to develop the draft program. The draft program generally reflects
the program recommendations and isdesigned to ensure that itwill meet the needs expressed by
the community while supporting good design practices and achieving the city's long-term
planning objectives.
A summary of the draft program is shown in table 1 and table 2. Additional information is
provided inappendixaandappendix b, further details and rationale isprovided inthe program
recommendations report in attachment #2.
10
to: planning and developmentcommittee
from: generalmanager planning and development
re: housingchoicesphase la: draft program
2023 january 30. Poge5
the proposals for the program are still in draft form. Ifapproved by council they will be presented
to the public at open houses in early spring 2023. Feedback received will be used to develop afinal
program tobebrought back tocouncil for approval.
Table 1: summary of draft program for laneway homes
program eleinent lanewayhomes
zoning districts all zoning districts that permit single-family homes. '
eligible properties properties with a single-family home and vehicular access to the rear yard
from the sideor rearof the property, via an openlaneor residential street.
Subject to streamside protection and enhancement area regulations, traffic
safety review, and other requirements.
Maximum dwelling
units per property
3 (single family home with secondary suite and laneway home).
Ownership single title for the property.
Maximum floor
area
the lesser of:
20% oflot area (0.2 far); and
140m^ (1,506.95 sq. Ft. ).
Subject to meeting otherregulations suchassetbacks and lot coverage.
Minimum floor
area
30 m^ (322.93 sq. Ft. )
maximum height two storeys and
no higherthanthe lowerof:
o 7.6 m(24.93 ft. ) for a sloping roofor 6.7 m(21.98 ft. ) for a flat roof;
and
o the highest pointof the principal dwelling.
Cellars and basements will be permitted and will count as one storey.
Setbacks 1.2m (3.94 ft. ) minimumfrom lane
2.4 m (7.87 ft. ) minimum from house
side setbacks asperexisting zoning bylaw regulations for the main
dwelling.
Lot coverage 45% maximum for buildings/structures
70% maximum for impervious surfaces
minimum number
of parking stalls for
the whole property
1 van accessible parking pad or carport space.
(1 space for up to 3 units)
environmental
design
step code level 3
outdoor space 2 trees per site (or as per burnaby tree bylaw which isanticipated to be
updated later in 2023).
Private outdoor space for the laneway home will beencouraged: minimum
4m^ (43.06 sq. Ft. ) private patio or minimum 3m^ (32.29 sq. Ft. ) deck or
balcony.
'see appendixaregarding al, a2 and a3 zoning districts.
11
to: planning and development committee
from: general manager planning anddevelopment
re: housing choices phase ia: draft program
2023 january 30. Page 6
program element : laiiew^; homes
access/addressing a clear unobstructed pedestrian access path from the street will be required:
minimum 0.91m (3 ft. ) wide and clear to sky.
L suffix will be added to the main address to identify laneway home (e. G.
Li-5044 main street).
Servicing and
utilities
separate sewer, water and power.
Supplementaryutility charges (being the rental suite in a singlefamily
dwelling- supplementary utility fee in the bumaby consolidated fees
and charges bylaw).
Supplementary utility charges will be charged regardless ofwhether the
laneway home is rented or not. Fees are subject to further analysis and
consultation.
No additional garbage receptacle required.
Application process building permit
this approach is subject to change pending results from the development
approvals process (dap) project.
Heritage exceptions to these regulationsmay be considered to preserve heritage
buildings, through the heritage revitalisation agreement process.
Table 2: summary of draft program for secondary suites in semi-detached homes
program element suiteis^ semi-detached homes
zoning districts all zoning districts that permit two-family homes.
Eligible properties propertiesv^th a two-familysemi-detached home and vehicularaccess to the
rear yard from the side or rear ofthe property, via an open lane or residential
street.
Maximum
dwelling units per
property
4 (two semi-detached units, each with one secondary suite per unit).
Ownership suite may not be separately strata-titled jfrom the semi-detached unit.
Maximum floor
area
no maximum floor area for the secondary suite but it must be contained
within the semi-detached unit.
A secondary suite located in a cellar or in a fully accessible basementmay be
added to a semi-detached home and will not count as floor area. Floor area of
cellar secondary suites and fully accessible basement secondary suites must
be no greater than the floor area ofthe main storey.
Minimum floor
area
30 m^ (322.93 sq. Ft. )
maximum height two storeys and
9.0 m (29.5 ft. ) for a sloping roof or 7.4 m (24.3 ft. ) for a flat roof; or
for a semi-detached home with a fully-accessible basement secondary
suite: 10.5m (34.4 ft) for a sloping roof, or 8.9m (29,2 ft. ) for a flat roof.
Cellars and fully accessible basements constructed as secondary suites will be
permitted and will not count as a storey.
Setbacks setbacks for semi-detached homes will be as per existing zoning bylaw
regulations.
12
to: planning and developmentcommittee
from: general manager planning and development
re: housingchoices phase la: draftprogram
2023 january30. 7
prograin element suites in semi-detached homes:
lot coverage 45% maximum for buildings/structures.
70% maximum for impervious surfaces.
Minimum number
of parking stalls
for the whole
property
2 accessible parking pads or carport spaces.
(2 spaces for up to 4 units)
environmental
design
step code level 3
outdoor space as per burnabytree bylaw
private outdoor space for each suite will be encouraged: minimum 4m^
(43.06 sq. Ft. ).
Access/addressing s suffixes will be added to the main address to identify secondary suites, (e. G.
Si- 5049 main street).
Servicing and
utilities
servicing as persecondary suitesin single-family homes.
Supplementary utility charges (being the rental suite ina two family dwelling-supplementary utility fee inthe bumaby consolidated fees and
charges bylaw).
Supplementary utility charges for suites will only becharged ifa suite is
rented out.
Fees are subjectto further analysis and consultation.
No additional garbage receptacle required.
Application
process
building permit
this approach issubject to change pending results from thedevelopment
approvals process (dap) project.
7.0 transportation impacts
the underlying premise for residential ofif-street parking requirements are that residents need
a place to 'store' their vehicle(s) on their property. The regulation of parking for vehicles
within residential properties isregulated by the bumaby zoningbylaw schedule no. Vi11 offstreet parking. Itisstandard toprovide parking on the property tomeet most demands and to
minimize spill-over onto the public streets. Providing more compact housing forms and
multiple units ona single site will generate more parking demands on-site. There are concerns
from the engineering perspective that the reduced parking provisions as presented inthe draft
program {appendices a and b) will increase pressure for on-street parking where there is
currently inadequate supply inmany neighbourhoods. The proposed programrecommendation
will reduce the current bylaw parking requirements on-site byapproximately 60%.
The demand for parking, which can change over time, is affected by a number of factors
including proximity to transit, cycling infrastructure, and other alternative modes available
including carshare vehicles. However, without the technical review of actual vehicle
ownership, on-street utilization and market conditions, there is minimal data to support the
parking rationale in the draft program. As part ofthe city's transportation goals and the
climateaction framework, residents are encouraged to usemore sustainable modes; however,
they will continue to rely on the automobile (i. E. Electric vehicles) in some capacity for the
13
to: planning and development committee
from: general manager planning and development
re: housingchoicesphase la: draft program
2023 january30. Page8
foreseeable future. Therefore, limiting parking supply on-site will impact the neighbourhood
balance for on-street parking.
Areview of comparable municipal parking bylaw rates (refer toappendix d) inthe lower
mainland including city of north vancouver, new westminster, richmond, coquitlam,
surrey, and vancouver confirmsthe number ofparking spaces required per unit varies between
1and 3, with the exception ofvancouver which allows for 1space for up to3units (0.33 spaces
per unit, for single detached houses with both a secondary suite and laneway house).
8.0 next steps
subject to council approval, the draft program will be shared with the public through the city
website and ata series ofopen houses to be held in spring 2023. Asurvey will also be distributed
tocollect feedback from the public. All ofthe open house materials, including the survey, will also
be available online. Feedback will be used to refine the draft program and to prepare a final
program forcouncil consideration andadoption.
9.0 recommendations
this report provides an update on the housing choices program, presents the financialanalysis
report and the program recommendations report, and presents the draft program for laneway
homes and suites in semi-detached homes.
It isrecommended thatthecommittee request that council approve thedraft program, outlined in
section 6.0, appendixa, and appendix bofthis report, as the basis for public consultation to be
held in early spring 2023. It is also recommended that the committee receive the financid
analysis report and program recommendations report, and forward them to council for their
information.
E. W. K
pl
sc/lf/kh: sa
attachments
general manager
and development
copiedto: chiefadministrative officer
deputy chiefadministrative officer and chieffinancial officer
general manager engineering
chiefbuilding inspector
city solicitor
director legislative services
r: \long range clerical\docs\sc\committec reports\2023\housing choices phase 1a-draft program (2023.02.08). Docx
14
appendix a
draft program for laneway homes
the table below describes the draft program for laneway homes. It includes the following topics:
1. Zoning districts
2. Eligible properties
3. Maximum dwelling units per property
4. Tenure
5. Floor area
6. Height
7. Setbacks
8. Lot coverage
9. Parking
10. Environmental design
11. Outdoor space
12. Access/addressing
13. Servicing and utilities
14. Application process
15. Heritage
16. Additional program elements
topic draft program additional information
1. Zoning
districts
laneway homes will be permitted
on eligible properties in all
zoning districts that permit single
family dwellings.
This includes the rl, r2, r3, r4,
r5, r6, r8, r9, rio, rl 1, r12,
rml, rm2, rm3, rm6, al, a2
and a3 zoning districts.
Zone districts al, a2 and a3 are
agricultural zoning districts. Laneway
home regulations in these zones are being
considered separately as part of an
agricultural lands review, which will
examine provincial regulations for
laneway homes on agricultural properties.
This report will be brought to this
committee in spring 2023.
2. Eligible
properties
properties must have:
a single family home; and.
Vehicular access to the
laneway home from the side
or rear of the property, via an
open lane or residential street.
Properties must be able to provide direct
vehicular access to the laneway home from
the side or rear of the property. If this
access is trom a residential street (for
example, on comer or double frontage lots)
it will be subject to approval from the
engineering department to ensure that the
driveway meets traffic safety standards.
Properties containing a stream or
located adjacent to a stream must
comply with the streamside
protection and enhancement
area regulations under the
zoning bylaw, which may limit
the laneway home potential of
those properties.
Properties within 30 metres of the top of
bank of a stream or ravine are subject to
the streamside protection and
enhancement area regulations under the
zoning bylaw. If all or a portion of the
rear yard of the property is located within a
streamside protection and enhancement
area, then this could limit the ability to
construct a laneway home.
15
appendix a - draft program for laneway homes
page 2
topic draft program additional information
laneway homes must be located
in the rear yard of a property.
There will be no minimum lot area for
eligible properties. However, properties
will need to have enough room in the rear
yard to meet bylaw requirements for
setbacks, lot coverage, tree provision and
parking provision in order to build a
laneway home.
3. Maximum
dwelling units
per property
single-family properties may
include a principal dwelling with
a secondary suite, and a laneway
home, for a total of three units.
Secondary suites will not have to be
removed in order to add a laneway home
to a property. This will ensure that existing
tenants aren't impacted by the addition of a
laneway home.
4. Tenure a property with a laneway home
must remain under a single title.
This means that the laneway
home cannot be stratified or
subdivided and sold separately
from the main house.
Stratification may be considered in later
phases of the housing choices program, in
conjunction with additional financial
analysis to support an attainable home
ownership program.
A laneway home may be used by
the owner and their family/guests
or rented out as a long term rental
unit.
In order to protect the long term rental
stock in bumaby, laneway homes will not
be permitted as short term rentals.
The owner will not be required to
live on the property. However, if
the owner lives off-site, they will
be required to apply for an annual
home rental business license.
This is the city's current practice for house
rental businesses where a single family
dwelling is rented or offered for rent, and
is not occupied by the owner. The purpose
of this license is to obtain the contact
information for the owner or their
designate so that they may be contacted in
the event that there are any issues with the
property.
Owners will only be required to apply for
one home rental business license per
property.
5. Floor area maximum floor area for a
laneway home:
the maximum floor area for a
laneway home will be the lesser
of:
20% of the lot area; or
140 m^ (1,506.95 sq. Ft. ).
The maximum floor area for a
laneway home will be calculated
separately from, and unaffected
by, the size of the principal
dwelling.
20% of lot area is equivalent to &floor
area ratio of 0.2. This means that a 4,000
square foot lot could have a laneway home
of up to 800 square feet, and a 6,000
square foot lot could have a laneway home
of up to 1,200 square feet. However, in no
event may a laneway home be more than
1,506 square feet regardless of the lot size.
Many properties will not be able to achieve
the maximum floor area due to other
restrictions such as lot coverage, setbacks
and maximum height.
16
appendix a - draft program for lancway homes
page 3
topic draft program additional information
minimum floor area for a
laneway home:
the minimum floor area for all
laneway homes, regardless of the
size of the lot, will be 30 m^
(322.93 sq. Ft. ).
The minimum floor area (323 square feet)
reflects bumaby's current minimum unit
size for a secondary suite. If the city's
minimum unit size for a secondary suite is
changed, minimum laneway home sizes
may be reviewed.
6. Height maximum height for a
laneway home:
no more than 2 storeys; and
no higher than the lower of:
o 7.6 m (24.93 ft. ) for a
sloping roof, or 6.7 m
(21.98 ft. ) for a flat roof;
and
o the height of the principal
dwelling on the property,
provided the principal
dwelling complies with the
maximum height permitted
under the zoning bylaw for
the applicable zoning
district.
The proposed maximum heights are high
enough to permit a two-storey laneway
home without compromising ceiling
height.
Two-storey laneway homes received the
highest level of support in the housing
choices survey (40%) followed by 2.5
storeys (33%). There were 2,319 responses
to this survey question.
An additional 0.5 m (1.64 ft. )
may be permitted to support
passive house, net zero, or bc
energy step code 5 buildings,
provided that the laneway home
must in any event be lower than
the height of the principal
dwelling.
The total height, with permitted additions
must still be lower than the maximum
height for a principal dwelling in the zone
district.
Basements and cellars will be
permitted in laneway homes and
will count as one storey. They
will also count towards the total
floor area.
Crawl spaces will not be
permitted.
Unlike in the principal building of single
family dwellings, it is recommended that
cellars count as one storey when in a
laneway home. This is to prevent 'two
storey with cellar' forms in the smaller
building envelope of a laneway home.
These forms typically have low ceilings on
each level, as the building height of a
laneway home is lower than a single
family home. This would reduce livability
for occupants.
Crawl spaces are not permitted to
encourage at grade construction and to
reduce overall building height for the
laneway home.
17
appendix a - draft program for lancway homes
paged
topic draft program additional information
7. Setbacks side yard setbacks: a laneway
home will be required to have the
same side yard setbacks that are
set out for a principal building in
the zoning bylaw.
Rear setback: the laneway
home should be set back a
minimum of 1.2 m (3.94 ft. ) from
the rear property line. This is
subject to any additional
requirements for lane
intersections, as specified in the
zoning bylaw.
Separation from the principal
dwelling: there should be at
least 2.4m (7.87 ft. ) between a
laneway home and the main
house.
These building setbacks are based on bc
building code requirements. They are put
in place to provide adequate light and
space between buildings, reduce impacts
on neighbouring properties, and to meet
fire and safety standards.
8. Lot coverage lot coverage:
the laneway home, main house
and any other structures may not
cover more than 45% of the lot
area.
Impervious surfaces:
no more than 70% of the lot area
may be covered by impervious
surfaces (e. G. Buildings,
hardscaped patios and pathways).
Lot coverage and impervious surface
restrictions are put in place to support
stormwater drainage, and prevent
downstream drain overflows and flooding.
These maximums reflect the existing
standards that are used in the city's
models for stormwater runoff. These
standards have also been used to model
different laneway home design scenarios
for bumaby lots.
Properties with homes with a large existing
building and/or pavement footprint
(relative to the lot size) may not have
sufficient space remaining to build a
laneway home.
The city is currently reviewing best
practices for stormwater management.
These restrictions may be relaxed in the
future, if runoff can be reduced by
including innovative onsite stormwater
management practices.
18
appendix a - draa program for lancway homes
page 5
9. Parking 1 parking space will be required
on the property. This must be
uncovered or in a carport, and
meet the city standard for a van
accessible parking space
(5.5m (18.04 ft. ) l x 3.4 m (11.15
ft. ) wx 2.3 m (7.55 ft. ) h).
The parking area must include an
energized outlet capable of
providing level 2 charging for an
electric vehicle.
Additional parking spaces may be
provided but will not be required.
These may be uncovered, in a
carport, or in a garage. Existing
detached garages can remain on
the property subject to building
separation requirements. Garages
attached to a laneway home, or
attached to a laneway home
carport, will be counted as
laneway floor area.
This parking requirement is lower than the
city's current standard for off-street
parking.
Current standards would require
homeowners to provide a minimum of 3
off-street parking spaces for properties
with a laneway home and a secondary
suite.
Outdoor parking spaces are recommended,
as studies have shown that interior garages
are often not used for parking. The outdoor
parking space required for a laneway home
will be in addition to any indoor parking
spaces on the property. This means that in
many cases homes with indoor parking
will be providing more than one parking
space.
Van accessible parking is preferred, to
accommodate residents with a wide range
of needs and prevent congestion in the
lane.
This parking requirement is being
recommended for the following reasons:
lower parking requirements support
more flexible design options, and will
make it easier to build one-storey,
fully accessible laneway homes that
are less intrusive to neighbouring
properties.
Lower parking requirements do not
prevent residents from adding more
parking spaces. Having a lower
minimum requirement will give people
flexibility to choose how much
parking to provide on their property,
according to their needs and the
characteristics of their site.
Lower parking requirements reflect the
directions of the bumaby
transportation plan and climate
action framework by discouraging
driving and providing more room for
trees and green space.
19
appendix a - draft program for laneway homes
paged
topic draft program
bike lockers up to 6m^ (64.58
sq. Ft. ) and no higher than 1.2m
(3.94 ft. ) will be excluded from
floor area calculations.
Additional information
in the housing choices survey,
conducted in spring 2022, over two
thirds of respondents indicated that
they would support lower parking
requirements. (total respondents;
2,320).
Bumaby is well served by transit. It
has two skytrain lines, three rapid bus
routes, and additional higher order
transit planned for the future.
Currently, 98% of single and two
family properties are located within a
10 minute walk of a transit stop or a
skytrain station.
Bike lockers provide a secure location for
storing bikes and electric bikes.
10. Environmental
design
laneway homes must be built to
a minimum of step 3 of the
energy step code.
This requirement is based on anticipated
revisions to part 9 of the bc building
code, which regulates residential buildings
with 3 storeys or less, having a building
area not exceeding 600 m^, including
laneway homes.
Anticipated revisions to the bc building
code in 2023 will support different
pathways for energy modeling and air
tightness testing, as well as for carbon
emissions. The additional pathways are in
part to support different sizes of part 9
homes, which would include laneway
homes. The additional pathways aim to
mitigate the difficulty for smaller homes,
like laneway homes, to meet the current
step code, carbon emission and air
tightness testing requirements.
20
appendix a - draft program for laneway homes
page?
Topic draft program additiohal information
11. Outdoor space it is proposed that a minimum of
two trees be required on the
property. This proposal is subject
to the results of the upcoming
review of the bumaby tree
bylaw.
The urban forest is of key importance to
climate action and adaptation to hotter
summers and wetter winters. Although it
may be necessary to remove some trees to
support laneway home development, the
city's goal is to have no net loss of trees
and, if possible, net gain via replacement
tree planting. Staff are currently reviewing
the bumaby tree bylaw with a climate
action/adaptation lens and finalizing the
urban forest management strategy. It is
anticipated that this work will be complete
before the implementation of the laneway
homes program, and will be used to guide
tree requirements for laneway home
development.
An outdoor patio with minimum
area of 4 m^ (43.06 sq. Ft. ) or
deck/balcony minimum 3 m^;
(32.29 sq. Ft. ) will be encouraged
to provide open space for
occupants of the laneway home.
A design guide to planning outdoor spaces
will be provided as part of the program
implementation. Plans should consider
privacy and overlook to neighbouring
properties. Non-invasive and droughtresistant plants will be encouraged.
12. Access/
addressing
a clear unobstructed pedestrian
access path from the street will be
required, with a minimum width
of 0.91 m (3 ft. ) and clear to sky.
This is to provide safe pedestrian access to
the laneway home for emergency services.
The laneway home address
number must be clearly visible
from the street.
Each property will continue to have one
legal address. Laneway homes and suites
will be allocated the suffixes l and s in the
city's property databases, (e. G. Li-2600
port street). For city-wide mail-outs,
separate notices will be sent to laneway
homes and suites.
Additional guidelines for access and
addressing, such as the location of address
numbers, entrances and mailboxes, will be
provided in a design guide for the
program.
Accessibility features such as
stairlifts and ground-floor
bathrooms will be encouraged.
These will be encouraged through a floor
area exclusion in support of stairlifts and a
design guide that will accompany the
program.
13. Servicing and
utilities
separate sewer, water and power
servicing will be required.
Separate services have been recommended
to ensure that laneway home tenants are
not dependent on the principal dwelling to
access their services. This approach would
also support stratification if this is
introduced in the future.
21
appendin a - draft program for lancway homes
pages
topic draft program additional information
the city will charge an annual
supplementary utility fee for
providing water and sewer
services to a laneway home
regardless of whether it is rented
or not.
Supplementary utility fees are updated
annually and published on the city
website.
It is proposed that the fee for a laneway
home will be set to the same rate as the fee
for a rental suite in a single family
dwelling - supplementary utility fee in
the bumaby consolidated fees and
charges bylaw.
This fee will apply to laneway homes,
regardless of whether it is rented to a
tenant or not.
Fees are subject to further analysis and
consultation.
There will be no additional
garbage disposal fee unless a
larger receptacle is requested.
If there are two dwelling units on
the property (house and laneway
home, or house and secondary
suite) a maximum of one garbage
receptacle (up to 360l) will be
permitted.
If there are three dwelling units
on the property (house and
secondary suite and laneway
home), a larger receptacle (up to
360l) can be requested. If, after
upsizing to 360l, this is
insufficient, a second small
(120l) receptacle will also be
permitted.
The city's goal is to support waste
reduction and diversion, so a larger
garbage receptacle is not required for
properties with a laneway home, but can
be requested.
For efficiency, it is preferred that there is
only one garbage receptacle per property.
There is no limit to the number of
recycling bins that can be picked up.
A dedicated area for storing
garbage and recycling bins will
be encouraged.
Guidelines for the size and location of this
area will be provided in a design guide that
will accompany the program.
22
appendix a - draft program for laneway homes
topic draft program additional information
14. Application
process
construction of a laneway home
will require a building permit.
The application process will be similar to
building a single family home.
Applications with variance requests may
take additional time to process.
This approach is subject to change pending
results from the development approvals
process (dap) project.
A design guide will be developed to assist
with the application process. This will
include information on site planning to
support neighbourly, accessible and
sustainable designs.
15. Heritage exceptions to these regulations
will be considered to preserve
heritage buildings, through the
heritage revitalization
agreement process.
Measures considered may include:
siting relaxations
allowing construction of laneway
homes on properties without lane or
street access.
16. Additional
program
elements
other design considerations given
in the program recommendations
report (attachment #2), such as
placement of windows and decks,
landscaping and entranceways)
may also be included in the
program.
These design considerations do not require
bylaw amendments but will be encouraged
through a design guide that will
accompany the program.
Additional program elements that the city
will explore in the years following
program activation include;
setting up a portal to store and share
preapproved designs that meet or
exceed the city's policies and best
practices.
Opportunities to support
improvements to the lane (e. G. To make
it safer, more accessible and pedestrian
friendly).
The viability of implementing a
laneway naming program to contribute
to the identity and character of lanes.
23
appendix b
draft program for secondary suites in semi-detached homes
the table below describes the draft program for secondary suites in semi-detached homes. This includes:
1. Zoning districts
2. Eligible properties
3. Maximum dwelling units per property
4. Tenure
5. Floor area
6. Height
7. Setbacks and lot coverage
8. Parking
9. Environmental design
10. Outdoor space
11. Access/addressing
12. Servicing and utilities
13. Application process
14. Additional program elements
topic draft program additional information
1. Zoning
districts
secondary suites in semi-detached
homes will be permitted on eligible
properties in all zoning districts that
permit two-family dwellings.
This includes the r4, r5, r6, r8,
r12 and rm6 zoning districts.
Secondary suites will be permitted in
semi-detached homes where the units are
placed side-by-side, or front-to-back on
a lot.
As per the bc building code, suites will
not be permitted in up/down duplexes,
where dwelling units are above or below
other dwelling units, due to fire
separation requirements.
2. Eiigible
properties
eligible properties must have:
a semi-detached home; and
vehicular access to the property
from the side or rear of the
property, via an open lane or
residential street.
Properties must be able to provide direct
vehicular access to the side or rear of the
property. If this access is from a
residential street (for example, on comer
or double fronted properties) it will be
subject to approval fim the engineering
department to ensure the driveway
meets traffic safety standards.
3. Maximum
dwelling
units per
property
properties may include a secondary
suite in each side of the semi
detached home, for a total of four
dwelling units.
4. Tenure secondary suites will be rental
tenure only.
Secondary suites cannot be sold
separately from the semi-detached home.
Secondary suites may be used by
the owner and their family/guests or
rented out as a long-term rental
unit.
Secondary suites cannot be rented out as
short term rentals. This is to help protect
the long-term rental supply.
24
appendix b - draft program for secondary suites in semi-delached homes
page 2
topic draft program additional information
the owner will not be required to
live on the property. However, if
the owner lives off-site, they will be
required to apply for an annual
home rental business license.
The requirement for a home rental
business license reflects the city's
current practice for secondary suites in
single-family homes where the property
owner rents out both the principal
dwelling unit and the secondary suite.
The purpose of this license is to obtain
the contact information for the owner or
their designate so that they may be
contacted in the event that there are any
issues with the property.
Owners will only be required to apply
for one home rental business license per
property.
5. Floor area there will be no restrictions on the
maximum floor area of a secondary
suite, but it must fit within the floor
area permitted for the semi
detached home.
This reflects changes to the bc building
code that were introduced in 2018 to
remove size limits for secondary suites.
This supports the provision of 2 and 3
bedroom secondary suites, which are
currently in short supply in bumaby.
Secondary suites will have a
minimum floor area of 30 m^
(322.93 sq. Ft. ).
This is the city's minimum floor area
requirement for secondary suites.
Floor area minimums are put in place to
maintain livability standards.
Full cellars will be permitted in
two-storey semi-detached homes
with secondary suites. Cellar floor
area will not count towards the
overall floor area calculation. The
floor area of the cellar may not
exceed the floor area of the main
storey.
Fully-accessible basements^ will be
permitted in two-storey semi
detached homes with secondary
suites. They will not count towards
the overall floor area calculation.
The floor area of fully accessible
basements may not exceed the floor
area of the main storey.
Full cellars are currently not permitted in
two-storey semi-detached homes. It is
proposed that full cellars now be
permitted to support the addition of
secondary suites.
Basements differ from cellars in that
they must have over 50% of their height
above grade. There is a preference for
basements over cellars as they generally
provide more light and livability for
tenants. Fully accessible basements are
being encouraged as they will
accommodate people with a wide range
of needs.
' k fully accessible basement means a basement that meets accessibility requirements, as described in the bc
building code. Guidance is provided in the 2020 building accessibility handbook available on w\nv. Bccodes. Ca
25
appendix b - draft program for secondary suites in semi-dctached homes
topic draft program additional information
6. Height maximum height for semi
detached homes with a
secondary suite: two storeys, and
9.0m (29.5 ft. ) for a sloping roof,
or
7.4m (24.3 ft. ) for a flat roof.
This is the same maximum height as
permitted for a single-detached home in
the r4, r5, r6, r8, r12, and rm6
districts. Heights for semi-detached
homes were originally reduced in these
zoning districts to prevent the addition
of secondary suites.
Cellars and fully accessible
basements constructed as a
secondary suite will not count as an
additional storey.
The maximum height for a semi
detached home with a fully
accessible basement suite will be
10.5m (34.4 ft. ) for a sloping roof,
or
8.9m (29.2 ft. ) for a flat roof.
Basements in bumaby typically count as
one storey. To encourage more housing
suitable for a range of mobility needs,
fully accessible basements constructed
as a secondary suite will not count as a
storey and will be permitted a height
relaxation.
7. Setbacks and
lot coverage
as per the zoning bylaw for semi
detached buildings.
Setbacks and lot coverage for newly
constructed semi-detached homes will
not change from existing zoning
regulations.
8. Parking 2 parking spaces will be required
on the property. These must be
uncovered or in a carport, and
meet accessibility standards.
Each parking space must include an
energized outlet capable of
providing level 2 charging for an
electric vehicle.
Additional parking spaces may be
included on the site but they will
not be required. Additional parking
spaces may be located outside or in
garages. Garages will count
towards the maximum total floor
area allowed for the semi-detached
home.
This parking requirement is lower than
the current city standard. Current
standards would require homeowners to
provide a minimum of 4 off-street
parking spaces for properties with a
semi-detached home and two secondary
suites.
Outdoor parking spaces are preferred, as
studies have shown that interior garages
are often not used for parking. The
outdoor parking spaces required for a
semi-detached home with a secondary
suite will be in addition to any indoor
parking spaces on the property. This
means that in many cases homes with
indoor parking will be providing more
than two parking spaces.
Reduced parking requirements for
secondary suites in semi-detached homes
will help to support owners in legalising
existing secondary suites, making them
safer and protecting existing tenants.
Additional rationale for proposing lower
parking minimums are given in
appendix a, section 9).
26
appendix b - draft program for secondary suites in semi-detaehed homes
page 4
topic draft program additional information
9. Environmental
design
bc energy step code 3 for newly
constructed semi-detached homes
with secondary suites.
Semi-detached homes are included in
part 9 of the bc building code. Any
newly constructed semi-detached homes
(with or without suites) will need to meet
step 3 of the bc energy step code. For
additional details on the energy step
code see; www. Energvstedcode. Ca
10. Outdoor
space
an outdoor patio with minimum
area of 4 m^ (43.06 sq. Ft. ) will be
encouraged to provide open space
for occupants of the secondary
guidelines for outdoor space will be
provided in a design guide for the
program.
Suite.
11. Access/
addressing
a clear unobstructed pedestrian
access path from the street will be
required, with a minimum width of
0.91 m (3 ft. ) and clear to sky.
The secondary suite address
number must be clearly visible
from the street.
Secondary suites will be allocated the
suffix "s" in the city's property
databases, (e. G. Si-2600 main street).
For city-wide mail-outs, separate notices
will be sent to each secondary suite.
Additional guidelines for access and
addressing, such as the location of
address numbers, entrances and
mailboxes, will be provided in a design
guide for the program.
12. Utilities the city will charge an annual
supplementary utility fee for
providing water and sewer services
to each rented secondary suite in a
semi-detached home.
Supplementary utility fees are updated
annually and published on the city
website.
It is proposed that the fee for each rented
secondary suite in a semi-detached home
will be the same as the fees for a rental
suite in a two family dwellingsupplementary utility fee in the
bumaby consolidated fees and charges
bylaw.
These fees will only be charged if a
secondary suite is rented out. Owners
will be required to submit a
supplementary utility fees declaration
form to inform the city of the rental
status of their secondary suite(s).
Fees are subject to further analysis and
consultation.
27
appendix b - draft program for secondary suites in scml-detaehed homes
page 5
topic draft program additional information
there will be no additional garbage
disposal fee unless a larger
receptacle is requested.
A maximum of one garbage
receptacle (up to 360l) will be
permitted for each side of the semi
detached home.
The city's goal is to support waste
reduction and diversion, so large garbage
receptacles are not required for semi
detached homes with secondary suites,
but they can be requested.
For efficient solid waste collection, it is
proposed that there be no more than one
garbage receptacle for each side of the
semi-detached home (two in total).
There is no limit to the number of
recycling bins that can be picked up.
13. Application
process
construction of secondary suites
will require a building permit.
The application process to construct a
semi-detached home with secondary
suites, or to add a secondary suite to an
existing semi-detached home, will be
similar to the existing process for suites
in single-family homes. A guide
explaining the building code
requirements will be developed to assist
owners and builders with this process.
This approach is subject to change pending
results from the development approvals
process (dap) project.
14. Additional
program
elements
other design considerations given
in the program recommendations
report {attachment #2), such as
placement of doors and windows,
landscaping and entranceways) may
also be included in the program.
These elements do not require bylaw
amendments but will be encouraged
through a design guide that will
accompany the program.
28
appendix c
housing choices phase la: progress update
task description current status schedule
1. Public
consultation
launch survey to
raise awareness and
collect public input
on key design
elements (e. G. , offstreet parking,
height, size, outdoor
space).
Complete
a housing choices survey was launched
in march 2022 and received 2,550
responses.
Results from this survey were presented
to council on 2022 may 30 and are
available on the housing choices
website, www. Bumaby. Ca/housingchoices
winter
2022
notify and seek
engagement with
local first nations.
Complete
referrals were sent to local first nations
in march 2022. These included the tsleilwaututh nation, squamish nation,
musqueam indian band and kwikwetlem
first nation.
2. Technical
review
undertake technical
reviews to develop
recommendations
for program
elements such as
servicing, building
height and size, offstreet parking and
requirements for
outdoor space.
Complete
a technical review was undertaken in
april, may and june 2022. This included
a best practices review, a planning and
policy review, and design/modelling
analysis of housing forms on bumaby
lots.
Spring
2022
review the financial
implications of
different policy
approaches.
Complete
a consultant was retained in march 2022
to undertake a financial analysis for phase
la.
Results from this analysis are presented in
the financial analysis report (see
section 4.0 and attachment #1 of this
report).
3. Public
consultation #2
host design
workshops to gather
input from the
public, the
development
community, staff,
and other housing
stakeholders.
Complete
the city hosted a series of design
workshops in june 2022. These included
an industry workshop, two virtual public
workshops, an in-person public workshop
and an in-person open house. A summary
of what we heard is available on the
housing choices website.
Spring/
summer
2022
29
appendix c housing choices phase la: progress update
':2
4. Draft program develop draft
regulations and
circulate internally
for review and
input.
Results from tasks 1-3 were used to
develop recommendations for the
program (see section 5.0 and attachment
#2 of this report). These form the basis of
the draft program, presented in section
6.0 of this report.
Fall/
winter
2022/3
**we are here**
5.0cp
amendments
amend the official
community plan
(ocp) to support the
introduction of
laneway homes and
secondary suites in
semi-detached
homes.
An initial report to introduce the ocp
amendments is included as a separate
item on this committee meeting agenda.
This report will be followed by a 60 day
consultation period.
A second ocp amendment report will
provide the results of the ocp
consultation and request a public hearing.
It is anticipated that this will be brought
to this committee in summer 2023.
February
2023
6. Public
consultation
host open houses to
present the draft
program, seek
feedback, and
answer questions.
Subject to council approval, the draft
program will be presented to the public at
open houses in spring 2023.
Dates for these open houses will be
published on the housing choices
website as soon as they have been
confirmed.
Spring
2023
7. Final program present the final
program to council.
The draft program will be refined and
updated following public consultation
#3.
The final program will then be presented
to council for approval.
Spring/
summer
2023
8. Bylaw
amendments
amend the zoning
bylaw and other
city bylaws, as
needed, to support
the program.
This work will commence following
council approval of the final program.
It is anticipated that the bylaw
amendments will be brought to the
planning and development committee in
fall 2023.
Summer/
fall 2023
9. Implementation develop
communications
materials and
launch the
development
approvals process.
Communications materials will be
developed to support the program.
Subject to approval of the final program
and associated bylaw amendments, the
development approvals process will be
established in fall 2023.
Fall 2023
30
appendix c - housing choices phase la: progress update
page 3
10. Monitoring monitor progress. Following the program launch, data on
progress and any emerging issues will be
collected to support program monitoring
and review.
Ongoing
31
appendix d
housing choices phase la: comparable municipal off-street parking requirements
municipality type
city ofnorth
vancouver
one-unit use or two-unit
accessory secondarv suite/coach house use
1.0
1.0
city ofrichmond
single detached housing
two-unit housing
coach houses
2.0
2.0
1.0
city ofcoquitlam
one-family residential
duplex residential
secondary suites/accessory one-family
residential/carriage house or garden cottage
2.0
2.0
1.0
city of surrey single family dwelling 3.0
city ofvancouver
single detached house
single detached house with secondary suite
single detached house with secondary suite and
laneway house
1.0
0.5 (1 total)
0.33 (1 total)
city of bumaby
(current)
single family, two family, and row house
single familv with secondary suite
1.0
1.0
32

October 2022
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes
program recommendations report
city of burnaby
housing choices
2
table of contents
executive summary
introduction
1. What we heard
2. What we learned
3. What we are trying to achieve
4. How we are going to achieve it
5. Implementation
6. Next steps
7. Future considerations
6
8
10
20
28
36
62
66
70
burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 3
the above rendering illustrates a future vision for laneways in burnaby, where diverse housing
choices foster a vibrant public realm and support the community's broader goals.
4
burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 5
executive summary
the city of burnaby has launched a housing
choices program to introduce new housing options
into the city, bridging the gap between single-family
homes and apartments or condos. The first options
being prioritized are laneway homes and secondary
suites in semi-detached homes.
Since there are many ways in which these two
housing choices can look, function, and be
implemented, a process was undertaken to: gather
public input; collect information from city staff;
undertake a scan of similar programs in other
jurisdictions; and review relevant city policies, plans,
and strategies. This work culminated in a series
of recommendations for the implementation of
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes
in burnaby.
Emerging themes from public and stakeholder
input included the desire for flexibility (recognizing
that no one approach fits all), optimization (making
the best use of space and resources), suitability
(providing diverse solutions for diverse needs), and
expediency (making the development process
easy and simple). Detailed input was also provided
on topics ranging from parking and setbacks, to
landscape design and livability.
City staff from diverse departments also provided
insights on these topics, plus additional realms
such as engineering, servicing, and permitting.
Community and staff input built on previous
city-led community engagement and planning
processes, including home: burnaby's housing and
homelessness strategy, burnaby housing needs
report, mayors task force on community housing,
burnaby transportation plan, climate action
framework, community safety plan, and more.
The resulting recommendations aim to support
goals for housing diversity, accessibility,
transportation choices, climate action, open space
and rainwater management, livability, heritage
and character, privacy and safety, and public life.
To bring these goals to life, the recommendations
provide direction on zoning and lot suitability,
tenure, laneway and public realm, siting, parking,
access and identification, landscaping and
permeability, trees, servicing, waste and recycling,
topography, form, interface with lane/street, privacy
and overlook, lighting, accessibility, and building
size, coverage, height, and performance. Further
recommendations are offered for quick and efficient
implementation.
These recommendations will be used as a
foundation for the city of burnabys zoning bylaw
amendments for laneway homes and suites in
semi-detached homes, and may inform future
phases of the housing choices program.
6
burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 7
introduction
the city of burnaby is introducing new residential
unit types that respond to the growing need
for more housing choices across the city. The
mayors task force on community housing (2019)
identified the need for new housing forms in
local neighbourhoods, while the citys housing
needs report (2021) specifically noted the need
for more missing middle housing options across
burnaby. In response, home: burnabys housing
and homelessness strategy (2021) prioritizes
an infill housing program that begins with the
introduction of laneway homes and suites in semidetached homes in the citys residential (r) district
neighbourhoods.
The housing choices program is intended to
facilitate the development of residential infill that:
is compatible with neighbourhood character; is
livable, safe, and accessible; has adequate outdoor
space; offers privacy for residents and neighbours;
meets storage and parking needs; and supports
a myriad of other city plans/policies with topics
ranging from transportation to climate action. In
order to determine how to best implement this first
phase of the housing choices program, a process
was undertaken to:
phase 1a of the housing choices program will introduce laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes
across burnaby. This will be followed by more dense forms of missing middle housing in phases 1b and 2.
Phase 1a phase 1b
laneway homes and suites in
semi-detached homes
homes with two suites and
fourplexes
8
 gather public input from residents,
the development community and other
stakeholders to understand preferences and
priorities;
 collect information from city staff related
to considerations for planning, design, and
implementation;
 undertake a review of similar programs and
policies in other jurisdictions, in order to glean
insights from applications in other municipalities;
and
 review relevant city policies, plans,
strategies, and bylaws to ensure alignment and
find opportunities to meet diverse goals.
This report synthesizes and summarizes the
outcomes of community and staff engagement, and
scan of pertinent city directions. Taken together,
these elements shaped the recommendations
outlined in this report, which aim to optimize the
effectiveness of introducing laneway homes and
suites in semi-detached suites in neighbourhoods
across burnaby.
Phase 2 mid-rise buildings
full range of "missing middle"
housing types
burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 9
1
what we
heard
10
11
extensive public engagement on housing has been
undertaken in burnaby in recent years, shedding
light on community needs and priorities related to
housing affordability, diversity, tenure, accessibility
supports, partnerships, programs, and more.
The engagement undertaken for this process
specifically focused on the planning, design, and
implementation of laneway homes and suites in
semi-detached homes, and included a public
online survey, a virtual workshop targeting industry
partners, in-person and virtual public workshops,
and a drop-in public open house. This section offers
a snapshot of those activities, and the input themes
that emerged.
What we heard
how we engaged
in-person community workshop and drop-in
public open house
an in-person community workshop was hosted on
june 22nd, 2022 at the bonsor recreation complex.
A total of 105 participants registered for this event.
This workshop was facilitated using smaller group
discussions, with tables of 10 participants offering
input on preliminary design options as well as their
preferences related to precedent projects. This
input was captured using interactive worksheets,
which prompted participants to share what was
working well, what needed to be improved, and
what required further exploration.
The facilitated portion of the workshop was
complemented by a drop-in open house event at
the same venue, where panels offered background
information, a summary of results from the online
survey, and preliminary design options and a
sample of precedent projects. The general public
was encouraged to provide input on the boards and
city of burnaby staff were available to answer any
questions.
12
virtual workshops
to complement the in-person workshop, three
virtual sessions were hosted using zoom and miro,
an online collaboration platform.
Community workshops
similar to that of the in-person workshop, two virtual
workshops (june 27th and 29th, 2022) offered an
opportunity for residents to learn about the housing
choices program, provide input on preliminary
design options, and share their preferences
related to various precedent projects. A total of 100
participants registered across the two workshops.
Development industry workshop
to ensure that preliminary design options were
implementable, a development industry specific
workshop was hosted on june 20th, 2022, which
focused on opportunities and challenges related
to designing, planning, and building housing in the
lower mainland. A total of 50 participants registered
for the event, and offered a range of experience
in the areas of architecture, planning, finance, real
estate and development, and others. Participants
shared their experiences working in burnaby as well
as in other municipalities in the region.
Burnaby housing choices email
throughout this process, residents were able
to contact the city directly through the burnaby
housing choices project email (housingchoices@
burnaby. Ca). Approximately 120 items of
correspondence from residents were received
since the housing choices program was launched
in february 2022, which ranged from preferences
related to site coverage, to questions on timing of
program implementation.
Online survey
the city hosted an online survey that asked
residents to share their preferences related to
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes. There were 2,550 respondents. The
outcomes from this survey provided a foundation
for the exploration of design options and informed
the project teams approach to engaging residents
through the various workshops. A summary of this
engagement activity is available for review on the
project website at: burnaby. Ca/housingchoices.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 13
who we reached
over 250 people registered across the four
workshops, with an estimated additional 100
participants attending the drop-in open house
component of the in-person workshop and 2,550
survey respondents. Although demographic
information was not collected, the engagement
process involved conversations with a diversity
of residents, including renters and homeowners,
ranging in ages, family structures, and lived
experiences.
14
what we heard
overall emerging themes
input was plentiful and diverse, however several
themes emerged across the various engagement
activities. The most prominent themes are as
follows:
flexibility  no one approach fits all.
Participants supported a diversity of options for
laneway homes  including number of storeys,
building heights, parking, setbacks, forms, rooflines,
outdoor spaces, landscaping, entrances, and
more. Participants often highlighted the need to
respond to site constraints, including topography,
neighbouring properties, and lot configurations.
For both laneway homes and secondary suites,
there was support to provide some guidelines and
regulations to help achieve city and community
priorities, with enough flexibility to allow for creative
solutions and designs that meet the needs of
residents.
Optimization  make the best use of space and
resources.
Participants supported efficient approaches that
considered both maximizing living space and
advancing other community priorities. Potential
solutions included cantilevered designs, providing
floor space above open parking, taking advantage
of sloped properties, and using flat roofs as private
outdoor spaces. There was general support for
higher building heights (2-3 storeys), to allow for
more open space particularly on smaller lots, while
encouraging larger one storey accessible units on
larger lots. Participants highlighted the importance
of balancing housing people with retaining and
restoring green spaces, as well as ensuring
buildings are efficient and adopt a holistic approach
to climate action.
Suitability  diverse needs require diverse
solutions.
Similar to the theme around flexibility, participants
voiced a desire to have specific solutions for
their unique needs for both laneway homes and
secondary suites. For example, multi-generational
homes may have different considerations for privacy
and shared outdoor spaces, including approaches
to the placement of windows and setbacks
between units. Another example is the suitability
of spaces to meet peoples unique accessibility
needs, in which (for example) the bedroom and
kitchen could all be located on the same floor and
accessed at grade with a no-step entrance.
Expediency  make the development process
easy and keep it simple.
Participants shared a sense of urgency to ensure
more diverse housing options are implemented in
burnaby as soon as possible. Participants would like
to see a streamlined approvals process  such as
pre-approved designs and reduced development
process requirements  in order to increase
certainty, improve efficiency, and decrease the
likelihood of delays and rising costs.
In addition to the emerging themes shared here, a
detailed community engagement summary will be
provided on the project website.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 15
emerging themes specific to
laneway homes
in addition to these overarching themes, several
more specific themes related to laneway homes
emerged:
parking
 general support for reduced parking
requirements, particularly if close to transit.
 Minimum parking should not be a ratio  at least
one parking space per lot was often viewed as
sufficient.
 Broad understanding that shifting demand in
vehicle ownership (due to carsharing, emerging
mobility technologies, working from home
trends) may reduce the need for parking in the
future.
 General appreciation for carports  ensuring
that this space is used for cars, with additional
opportunities for living space or outdoor space
above.
 Interest in exploring opportunities for parking in
the front of the principal dwelling.
Landscape design
 support for green roofs, permeable pavers, and
low maintenance xeriscaping.
 Appreciation for green spaces and private
outdoor spaces, however homeowners should
have the option to decide the amount and type
of landscaping.
Setbacks
 variable feedback around minimum setbacks
from the laneway, neighbouring properties, and
principal dwelling.
 Zero lot line / no set back will require further
analysis of servicing needs and impacts on
neighbouring properties, however there is
general support at a discretionary level.
The above diagram illustrates one of the many laneway home
design options that were presented through community engagement,
exploring opportunities for reduced setbacks and cantilevered forms.
16
storage
 general support for storage in cellar and
basement spaces.
 General support for providing bike storage and
exempting this from the allowable floor area.
Livable design
 support for opportunities such as overhangs to
protect from rain/sun, ensuring enough natural
light, and providing private outdoor spaces such
as balconies or patios.
Presence in the lane
 desire for laneway homes to be designed as
welcoming spaces, including considerations for
windows facing the lane, diversity of forms, and
material selection.
Privacy and safety
 concerns around windows facing neighbouring
yards with support for the use of clerestory
windows for natural light.
 Balconies are supported, with consideration
given to overlook.
 Participants often supported designs that
include some consideration for privacy through
landscaping or fencing.
 Concerns around existing traffic and safety
related to entrances from the lane, with
considerations for future improvements such as
lighting and traffic calming.
Addressing
 general interest in exploring addressing off the
lane.
Existing neighbourhood context
 laneway homes should consider and
complement their surrounding context,
including the height, form, and materials of the
principal dwelling and neighbouring properties.
Potential exemptions
 interest in exploring different rules for different
lot types, including larger lots or corner lots.
 Interest in stratification of laneway including
potential implications for affordability and future
land development.
Connections to broader city processes
 regarding future phases of the housing choices
program, there was general interest in two
laneway homes on larger lots, prefabricated
laneway homes that could be moved in the
future, and laneway homes on duplex lots.
 Support for provision of additional amenities,
including more parks, with increased densities.
 Recognition that the front setback of a main
dwelling can influence the siting and feasibility
of the laneway home.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 17
emerging themes specific to
suites in semi-detached homes
although many of the themes related to laneway
homes are applicable to suites in semi-detached
homes, some themes emerged related to this
specific form of housing:
 general interest in encouraging accessible
options wherever possible.
 Support for encouraging private outdoor spaces.
 Desire for access to both semi-detached homes
and secondary suites to be identifiable from the
street, with highly visible pathways or entrances
informed by design and site constraints.
 Support for spaces that are livable, including
adequate natural light into units.
 Preference for flexibility for homeowners to
provide solutions that meet their needs.
18
burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 19
2
what we
learned
20
21
existing city plans, policies, and
reports
the following city of burnaby plans and other
documents provide context or direction for the
housing choices program, and/or include goals
that could be further advanced by the effective
rollout of laneway homes and suites in semidetached homes.
Home: burnabys housing and homelessness
strategy (2021)
this action-oriented roadmap for addressing
housing opportunities over the next 10 years has
a vision in which burnaby is a place where people
can find a home, afford a home, and feel at home.
Key areas of local need range from more accessible
housing options to more affordable larger units
suitable for families.
The most relevant goals include: building inclusive,
livable neighbourhoods by increasing housing
choices and supporting housing for diverse needs;
and supporting a renter-friendly community by
protecting and growing rental housing stock.
Informing these goals was extensive community
input from the your voice, your home engagement
process, including a key emergent theme of gently
densifying neighbourhoods to increase supply and
diversity housing types.
Strategy #1 is to increase housing choices, including
new options such as laneway homes and suites in
semi-detached homes, including in lower-scale
neighbourhoods. This strategy addresses the needs
of:
 multi-generation families (including those
sharing their homes with parents, adult children,
or other relatives);
 families that are downsizing;
the city of burnaby is in the good position of being
able to learn what has worked well  and what
has not  from other municipalities that have been
regulating laneway homes and suites in semidetached homes for several years.
At the same time, burnaby is a unique place with
its own policy landscape and distinct opportunities
and constraints. This section summarizes key
considerations shared by diverse city departments
relating to engineering and servicing, urban design
and livability, heritage and character, parking
and transportation, environment and landscape,
accessibility, and zoning, building, permitting, and
fire protection.
Likewise, this section summarizes the citys
pertinent policies, plans, strategies, and bylaws,
recognizing that the introduction of missing middle
housing choices help support a myriad of city goals
and planning imperatives.
What we learned
22
 renters wanting to live in lower density
neighbourhoods;
 first-time homebuyers and homeowners
seeking a mortgage helper, as neighbourhoods
that are designated for single family homes and
duplexes  73% of burnabys land area  are
home to property values that have increased
significantly in recent years and are unattainable
for many households
an action for this strategy is to identify ways to
streamline the approval process for housing
applications.
Burnaby housing needs report (2021)
this report presents data and analysis of housing
issues specific to burnaby, and notes some
important needs that are directly pertinent to
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes. These needs include:
 an additional ~15,000 residential units to keep
up with population growth in the next 10 years,
including ~5,700 rental units;
 a greater diversity of housing stock through
ground-oriented multi-family housing, given that
most of the existing housing stock is apartment
buildings and single detached homes;
 addressing the gap between anticipated rental
need and the number of rental units currently in
development;
 improved affordability for renters, as most
renter households earning the median income
in burnaby experience moderate or extreme
housing unaffordability;
 more 2-bedroom units (1,160) and 3-bedroom
units (2,330) between 2021 and 2025 for families
with children and other families; and
 addressing the secondary market, which
comprises almost two thirds of renter
households, of which two-thirds is estimated to
be unauthorized.
Mayors task force on community housing (2019)
the mayors task force was assembled to urgently
address affordable housing concerns by providing
recommendations to council on innovative policies,
directions, and initiatives to increase the supply,
diversity, and affordability of housing in burnaby.
The task forces recommendations include the
relevant themes of: create livable neighbourhoods
(e. G. Develop a plan for introducing new housing
forms and family-oriented housing in a variety of
neighbourhoods); and support rental housing and
tenants (e. G. Increase the supply of affordable rental
housing). It also identifies a quick start action of
making it easier to build small-scale multiple family
homes in a wider variety of neighbourhoods to
serve renters and homebuyers wanting to live in
modest sized, ground-oriented housing.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 23
connecting burnaby: burnaby transportation
plan (2021)
connecting burnaby is a 30-year plan that will guide
transportation planning and policy decisions in the
city. Relevant to the housing choices program, the
plan integrates land use and transportation, in which
a diverse mix of housing and other uses meet daily
needs.
There is direction to ensure that streets are for
everyone and all modes, and the incorporation
of place-making in the design of transportation
networks, accounting for public and social spaces.
This includes focusing on creating safe and
inclusive streets in part through the application of
universal design principles: accessible, participatory,
comfortable, ecological, multi-sensory, walkable,
and predictable. There is further direction to
provide social spaces in streets for people to enjoy,
contributing to a communitys vibrancy, safety, and
sense of place. These directions are pertinent to
the housing choices program as they account for
access, as well as the relationships between infill
housing and the adjacent public realm (including
potentially laneways).
Climate action framework (2020)
the city of burnabys climate action framework
responds to the climate emergency through
adoption of carbon reduction targets and seven
big moves. The resilient neighbourhoods big
move envisions medium-density development
being strategically added to single and two-family
neighbourhoods in order to increase compact
growth and the efficient use of land for housing,
supporting transportation shifts away from cardependency as well as alignment with net zero
carbon buildings (big move 6). Identified co-benefits
include householder diversity, housing affordability,
public health and equity, and climate adaptation
through clean and cool indoor air, and stormwater
mitigation.
Community safety plan (2020)
this high-level strategic safety plan aims to
enhance community safety and well-being.
Directions that are relevant to this first phase of
the housing choices program include support for
many of the housing improvements identified in the
plans above, ranging from increased rental housing
and aging in place. Other relevant directions
include: more developments that apply safety
measures that focus on built form and public realm;
increased responsiveness of emergency services
(e. G. Improved call response times); and safe street
design (i. E. Also covered in burnabys transportation
plan).
Environmental sustainability strategy (2016)
this strategy encompasses many of the topics
covered in more recent plans such as connecting
burnaby and climate action framework. However
it also focuses on other goals such as healthy and
resilient watersheds, in which rainwater restores
and mimics natural flows and quality. This involves
strategies such as encouraging on-site rainwater
management and reducing the volume and
quality of water flowing off impermeable surfaces
through systems like rain gardens and permeable
pavement.
Social sustainability strategy (2011)
while older than the more recently adopted
housing-oriented reports and plans, this strategy
contains directions that nonetheless support
affordable and suitable housing. Other directions
that are relevant to the housing choices program
include promotion of adaptable housing for people
with different abilities, and providing opportunities
for the protection of privately owned heritage
resources.
24
official community plan (adopted 1998; updated
2014)
burnabys official community plan (ocp) provides
a long-term vision for managing the citys growth,
and is currently being reviewed. The current
ocp envisions a more complete community, an
environmentally aware community, a community of
economic opportunity, a community with increased
transportation choice, an involved community, and a
community within a livable region.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 25
city department sessions
as part of this engagement process, the project
team hosted a series of internal workshops with
diverse city departments to discuss potential
challenges and opportunities related to laneway
homes and suites in semi-detached homes in
burnaby. The majority of input received was related
to laneway homes and the summary of workshop
outcomes below reflects this.
Engineering and servicing
 the citys existing infrastructure capacity is
generally able to accommodate additional infill
opportunities, including laneway homes and
suites in semi-detached homes.
 There are multiple options to provide water,
sanitary, and storm services to laneway homes.
 If providing one connection, it should be
designed and planned to easily separate or
reroute in the future.
 On some properties, services might come from
both sides  for example, water on the streetside
and sewer on the laneway, depending on the
slope of the site.
 If the city implements a water metering
program, one meter will be provided per lot.
 Designs should prioritize opportunities to
capture, store, and slow down rainwater on-site.
Urban design and livability
 to support laneway activation, front doors
should face the lane where feasible, and
windows should be provided on the facade
facing the lane.
 Landscape designs should seek opportunities
for green edges, including vertical hedges or
vines on structures.
 Laneway homes on corner lots should be
allowed to orient to the side street, contributing
to the streetscape.
 Setbacks should be flexible and responsive to
the surrounding context.
 One parking space in the rear yard is preferred
to reduce the impact of parking on burnabys
urban fabric.
 Units should include a provision for bike storage,
including a floor area exception.
 There is support for larger sized laneway homes
with floorplans that allow for two-bedroom and
den options.
 Designs should prioritize high ceilings that allow
natural light into living spaces.
Heritage and character
 it is important to incentivize the preservation of
burnabys heritage houses.
 Stratification/subdivision should continue to
be allowed only for heritage revitalization
agreements (hras).
 Construction of laneway homes should be
permitted on lots that do not have access to a
lane or rear street if the development includes
retention of a heritage house through a heritage
revitalization agreement (hra)
 if retaining rather than demolishing a character
home, allowances should be permitted to
enable retention of the existing home and
development of a laneway home, such as
relaxation of parking requirements, setbacks,
density, height, and lot coverage; incentives
should be provided for projects that preserve a
heritage house through an hra, such as such
as permitting larger laneway homes or reducing
parking requirements.
 Heritage policies should be inclusive and
flexible, supporting people to stay in their
communities.
 The city should provide a consistent and clearly
defined set of incentives for property owners
with a heritage or character home to participate
in infill development opportunities.
26
parking and transportation
 primary access to laneway homes should be off
the laneway, with consideration of exceptions for
properties eligible for a heritage revitalization
agreement
 off-street parking requirements should consider
what is currently required under existing zoning
and what the additional expected parking
demand will be, based on tenure and number of
bedrooms.
 It may be possible to have different parking
requirements for applicants depending on a
propertys lot size, surrounding uses, proximity
to transit, and heritage status.
 Parking requirements should reflect ongoing
city transportation studies and processes.
Building and permitting
 the city of burnaby is currently exploring a
development permit process.
 There is interest in both pre-approved plans
and opportunities to include basic requirements
through the zoning bylaw.
 There is preference for some flexibility in the
approvals process to ensure that plans can
be modified without additional lengthy review
processes.
 There is a preference to avoid discretionary
processes, prioritizing prescriptive baseline
requirements such as setbacks, building
heights, and floor areas, to reduce review time
for building permitting staff.
Environment and landscape
 the city of burnaby currently requires step
1 of the bc energy step code and is aiming
to require step 3 for part 9 buildings this year.
There is support to incentivize designs that
exceed step 3 of the bc energy step code.
 Burnabys zoning bylaw requires a maximum of
70% impervious surfaces, introduced in 2005.
Houses built before this do not need to adhere
to this requirement.
 Burnabys zoning bylaw requires a maximum
lot coverage of 40% (+5% for separate garages in
some zones). There is broad support to maintain
existing permeable surfaces wherever possible.
Accessibility
 opportunities for single-storey, accessible
laneway homes should be explored on lots that
are sufficiently large.
 For multi-story accessible or supportive housing
options, designs with at least one bedroom on
the ground floor should be explored, with the
possibility of upstairs living spaces used by a
caregiver.
 For internal layouts, more open concepts with
reduced walls and posts are preferred.
 Designs should be adaptable, with consideration
for future tenants and occupants.
 Access to the units should be in the form of a
clear path from the laneway, with preference for
a smooth ramp instead of stairs.
 Opportunities should be sought to create a
more uniform edge along the lane, with careful
consideration for the placement of waste and
recycling receptacles.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 27
3
what we
are trying
to achieve
28
29
what we are trying to
achieve
there are many ways in which laneway homes
and secondary suites in semi-detached homes
can look and function in burnaby. This process
takes an outcomes-based approach to the
recommendations presented in part 4, in which
proposed directions aim to deliver on community
priorities identified through the public and
stakeholder engagement process (refer to part 1)
and in existing city plans and strategies (refer to
part 2). These include:
housing diversity
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes provide the opportunity to increase
housing diversity in neighbourhoods across
burnaby, particularly in areas that are comprised
predominantly of single family homes.
These new housing choices should contribute to
local rental supply, including for families requiring
two or three bedrooms, and in areas where there
are currently not many rental options. They also
should provide more choice for multi-generational
households, which can also serve to be more
inclusive of cultures and communities in which
multi-generational living is more commonplace.
Ideally laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes should also increase affordability for families
and others either seeking to live in them, or to use
them as mortgage helpers.
The above diagram visualizes a 'family-friendly' unit that offers
multiple bedrooms as well as bicycle storage. 30
accessibility
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes provide the opportunity to offer more
accessible, visitable, and adaptable housing
choices in burnaby. Not only should this increase
the inclusivity of neighbourhoods for all ages
and abilities, these new housing choices also
should help residents to age in place. Accessibility
considerations should be made for both internal
layouts and broader site designs.
Transportation choices
a cornerstone of burnabys transportation plan
is the integration of land use and transportation
systems. By increasing the efficient use of land,
particularly in lower density areas, laneway homes
and suites in semi-detached homes support a shift
away from car-dependency. This not only provides
more transportation choices  including healthy/
active modes of travel and transit  it reduces the
need for private vehicle parking, freeing up space
for other uses.
The above diagram highlights an opportunity for one-storey
laneway homes to offer accessible housing options.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 31
open space and rainwater
management
neighbourhood intensification brings opportunities
to think creatively about the management of open
space and rainwater infiltration. Site design should
be an important consideration in ensuring that
residents of laneway homes and suites in semidetached homes have access to private outdoor
space. It should also ensure that permeable spaces
sufficiently support healthy and resilient watersheds,
and help adapt to the impacts of climate change.
Climate action
the climate emergency demands that all municipal
projects contribute to significant greenhouse gas
emissions reductions. Consistent with burnabys
climate action framework, laneway homes and
suites in semi-detached homes support compact
growth, which encourages more trips taken by
active modes and transit (as noted above). These
new housing choices should also incorporate
measures that enable them to be net zero carbon
buildings.
The above diagram visualizes the relationship between permeable green spaces that allow
for rainwater infiltration and impermeable surfaces, such as standard roofs and streets.
32
livability
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes should be livable: appropriate, comfortable,
and dignified. Considerations such as generous
ceiling heights and access to natural light and green
space form an important part of making these new
housing choices highly livable for residents from all
walks of life.
This illustration was inspired by conversations overheard at the in-person community
workshop, summarizing the role of laneway homes in supporting livability in burnaby.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 33
heritage and character
cities are continually changing in the face of new
challenges and opportunities, and laneway homes
and suites in semi-detached homes will be part of
the evolution of local neighbourhood character. At
the same time, development of these new housing
choices should leverage opportunities to protect
and revitalize burnabys heritage buildings.
Privacy and safety
the design of laneway homes and suites in semidetached homes should consider privacy needs
both within their sites and to/from neighbouring
sites. At the same time, the addition of more
residents in a given area provides opportunities for
eyes on the lane/street, increasing sense of safety.
Likewise, the design of these new housing choices
should also account for emergency service access.
Public space and public life
with more people living in burnabys
neighbourhoods  and specifically along lanes 
there are exciting new opportunities to activate
these lanes in new ways. Increased opportunities
for public life and social interaction, for example,
should be considered as laneway homes and suites
in semi-detached homes are brought to life in
burnaby.
34
photo credit: smallworks.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 35
4
how we are
going to
achieve it
36
photo credit: lanefab.
37
zoning and lot suitability
intent
to enable laneway homes to be a viable option on
as many residential lots as possible.
Recommendations
 allow laneway homes in conjunction with a
single family home in all zoning districts that
permit single family residential use.
 Locate laneway homes on lots with driveway
access to the rear or side of the lot via a lane or
street.
 Permit both a secondary suite and laneway
home on a single family lot.
 Allow construction of laneway homes on
properties without lane or street access to the
rear property through heritage revitalization
agreements (hras).
 Consider laneway homes for a district lots in
conjunction with the agricultural land review
currently underway and, where applicable,
consistent with agricultural land reserve (alr)
regulations.
The input, learnings, and considerations
summarized in parts 1, 2, and 3 of this report have
been synthesized into a set of recommendations
for the housing choices program for laneway
homes and suites in semi-detached homes.
The recommendations encompass zoning and
lot suitability, laneway and public realm, siting,
identification and access, parking, landscaping
(including rainwater permeability and private open
space), trees, servicing and waste/recycling,
topography, building size and height, building
site coverage, building form, interface with the
lane or street, privacy and overlook, lighting, and
adaptability and accessibility.
These recommendations are intended to provide
high level direction, with the understanding that a
deeper review will be undertaken by the city that
will include more detailed directions for zoning and
other means of implementation.
How we are going to
achieve it laneway homes
38
tenure
intent
to ensure laneway homes help increase the
supply of rental housing in neighbourhoods across
burnaby.
Recommendations
 require laneway home occupancy to be rental
only.
 Align laneway home implementation with the
city of burnabys regulations for short term
rentals.
 Owner would not be required to live on the
property.
 Explore alternative tenure options in future
program phases, including stratification/
subdivision with provisions for below-market
ownership.
 Continue to allow stratification/subdivision
through heritage revitalization agreements
(hras).
Photo credit: lanefab.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 39
laneway and public realm
intent
to explore opportunities for public realm upgrades
in areas where there is significant uptake of laneway
homes.
Recommendations
 where construction of multiple laneway
homes may occur at the same time on the
same block, pursue opportunities for larger
off-site improvements. These could include
but are not necessarily limited to permeable
paving, expanded landscape planting, rainwater
management features, and traffic calming
measures such as speed humps, ground
murals, reduced road widths.
 Explore the creation of a laneway partnership
program to support residents in the stewardship
of lanes. For example, this may be in the
form of an adopt a lane volunteer program,
through which residents could apply for city
grants for public realm improvements, such as
landscaping or public art.
 Consider implementing a laneway naming
program to contribute to the identity and
character of lanes.
40
burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 41
siting
intent
to optimize housing choices on as many lots as
possible by: allowing laneway homes to coexist
with a wide variety of existing homes; and by
providing additional housing options for total site
redevelopment.
Recommendations
 locate the laneway home in the rear yard as
defined by the zoning bylaw.
 Require a minimum 0.91m (3) setback to the rear
property line.
 Require the side yard to be same as that of the
principal dwelling, as per the zoning bylaw.
 Do not require additional separation between
the laneway home and principal dwelling, or any
other structures such as garages or accessory
buildings, beyond what is required by the bc
building code.
 Consider siting relaxations, including reduced
side yard setbacks, through board of
variance (bov) (in case of hardship) or future
development variance permit (dvp) processes.
Siting relaxations could also be considered
when retaining an existing heritage or character
home.
Site
the above diagram illustrates one design option for
laneway homes that responds to the existing context.
42
this illustration highlights the various relationships to
consider when siting a laneway home on a property.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 43
parking
intent
to provide sufficient infrastructure to accommodate
a range of mobility needs, including a personal
vehicle.
Recommendations
 require one on-site vehicle parking pad for
three residential units (minimum 2.74m (9)
x 6.1m (20) each, in an open pad or carport)
perpendicular to the lane, with electric vehicle
charging infrastructure roughed in.
 This requirement may be reviewed
following completion of burnabys citywide parking review.
 Considerations for a future review of
parking requirements include, but
are not necessarily limited to, tree
preservation and supporting fully
accessible one-storey laneway homes.
Rationale
residential sites with a lane have the opportunity for vehicle parking on private property as
well as street parking at the front. On a 30 lot, which is the smallest lot width in burnaby,
there is potentially space for up to two parking spaces at the curb, and one to three parking
spaces off the lane.
As shown in the diagram at right, having more parking may be feasible but limits the floor
area and green space available. One off-street parking space is recommended in order to
promote livability with more floor area and green space.
 Allow new or existing garages to count toward
meeting the minimum parking requirement. If
the garage is attached to the laneway home, the
floor area of the garage will be included in the
laneway homes floor area ratio (far).
 Continue to exclude the floor area of new or
existing detached garages (up to 42m2
(452sf)
from the overall far for the site.
 Allow an far exemption for a bike garage.
(refer to building size recommendations on the
following pages).
44
these illustrations demonstrate how
varying levels of parking can influence a
laneway home's form and site design.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 45
identification and access
intent
to provide necessary fire and emergency access,
and clear addressing from the street.
Recommendations
 require a continuous fire access path that is a
minimum of 0.91m (3) wide, with a minimum
1.98m (6-6) overhead clearance. The surface
of the access path should be concrete or
interlocking pavers, with no flagstones or
intermittent pavers that might provide a tripping
hazard. Specifications to be verified with the
city's fire department.
 Provide an address number that is a minimum
of 152.4mm (6) high and visible from the street.
Also provide an address number that is visible
from the lane.
 Provide a mailbox, visible from the street,
adjacent to the address numbers or with
numbers on the mailbox.
Photo credit: lanefab.
46
these illustrations demonstrate how laneway homes may be
accessed from either the lane, or fronting street via the sideyard.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 47
landscaping, permeability, and
private open space
intent
to provide open space, private outdoor space, and
landscaping suitable for the number of residential
units on site. To improve environmental factors such
as increased biodiversity, decreased urban heat
island effect, and increased stormwater infiltration.
Recommendations
 allow a maximum of 70% impermeable
area, including all buildings, patios/decks,
impermeable driveways, and pavers.
 This requirement aligns with the citys
zoning bylaw. Consider reducing
maximum impermeable area to 60%
during future phases of the laneway
home program.
 Require private outdoor space for the laneway
home in the form of either a minimum 4m2 (43sf)
patio with a minimum dimension of 1.5m (5), or a
minimum 3m2 (32.3sf) balcony with a minimum
dimension of 0.9m (3).
Trees
intent
to maintain or increase the amount of trees and
canopy by retaining existing healthy trees and
providing new plantings.
Recommendations
 require retention of all trees that are greater than
203.2mm (8) diameter at breast height (dbh)
whose root zones do not intersect the footprint
of the new laneway home, proposed excavation
path for sewer / water servicing, or pathway to
the rear lot from the street.
 Provide a minimum of two trees on the site,
which can be either a retained existing tree(s) or
a new one(s).
 Replace any removed trees as per the
requirements of the citys tree bylaw.
 Where trees are to be retained, provide tree
barriers proportional to tree diameter as defined
by city of burnaby.
Photo credit: lanefab.
48
servicing, waste, and recycling
intent
to ensure that laneway homes are efficiently
serviced and respect the citys infrastructure
capacity, while reducing development costs and
minimizing impacts on existing neighbourhoods.
Recommendations
 require separate sewer, water, and power
servicing.
 Enable garbage and recycling totes to be
shared or separate as per the citys bylaws and/
or at the owners discretion.
 Require a dedicated outdoor area in the rear
yard for garbage and recycling bins that is a
minimum of 0.61m (2) x 1.83m (6), and to be
shown on site plans as part of the approvals
process. Locate this area away from bedroom
windows.
Rationale
separate servicing ensures sufficient capacity for both the
principal dwelling and laneway home, as well as offering flexibility
for potential future redevelopment configurations.
Topography
intent
to utilize the sites topography to optimize both
indoor living space and private outdoor space.
Where there is significant slope, to minimize
excavation, site dewatering, and exposed
foundation walls, and to ensure views from adjacent
properties are respected.
Recommendations
 discourage retaining walls at the property line.
 Minimize exposed foundations for laneway
homes on uphill lots.
 Encourage the siting of usable outdoor space
that aligns with the sites slope. For example,
provide patios that are accessed from upper
floors.
 Ensure that maximum building height
calculations are equally applicable to sloped
sites.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 49
size
intent
to allow a wide range of sizes, from studios to
family sized, with additional floor area beyond what
is currently allowed for the primary dwelling.
Recommendations
 allow up to an additional 0.2 far based on
existing zoning if all other requirements such as
lot coverage and setbacks are met.
 Count attached or enclosed garage space for
the laneway home toward the sites total far.
 Provide an underheight (3.9') floor area
exclusion for bike garages: 6m2
(65sf), which
should include a door to the exterior that has a
minimum width of 2m (6-6).
 Do not count carports that are open on two or
more sides toward the sites total far. Open
may include a fence, gate, or wall that is a
maximum of 1.2m (4').
Building
rationale
110 to 140m2
(1200 to 1500sf) can provide a family sized three bedroom, two bathroom
laneway home. To support larger laneway homes, an additional 0.2 far is recommended
on all lot sizes, subject to the maximum allowable laneway home size.
 Allow laneway homes to be a minimum size of
30m2
(323 sf).
 This requirement aligns with the citys
zoning bylaw and may be updated
during future phases of the laneway
home program, with opportunities
to reduce the minimum size via a
development variance process (dvp).
 Allow laneways homes to be a maximum size of
140m2
(1506 sf).
50
photo credit: smallworks.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 51
coverage
intent
to maintain open space while allowing laneway
homes on as many existing sites as possible.
Recommendations
 allow a maximum 45% site coverage.
Rationale
currently lot coverage in burnaby is 40% plus 5% for accessory
buildings in many zones. For most principal dwellings, lot coverage
is substantially less than 40%, allowing room for development of
accessory buildings without exceeding the 45% standard.
The above diagram illustrates the relationship
between buildings and open space on a lot.
52
height
intent
allow a wide range of styles, comfortable ceiling
heights, livable upper floors, and well insulated
roofs.
Recommendations
 allow a maximum height of 7.6m (25)
 allow a maximum average / flat height of 6.7m
(22)
 to allow for thicker roof insulation, enable
additional allowable height for homes achieving
passive house, net zero, or bc energy code
step 5: 0.5m (1-7)
 require that the laneway home height not
exceed the height of the principal dwelling.
Rationale
generous height requirements improve
livability of the upper floor, provide headroom
clearance at stairs, and encourage well
insulated roof assemblies.
For a gable roof design with a 25 peak
height, and 22 average height, the eave
height would be 19. This is high enough for
the second floor to have an internal spring
point for the ceiling that is ~7 above the
finished floor. This allows for stairs, windows,
and usable headroom throughout the upper
floor.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 53
form, foundation, and roof
design building performance
intent
allow a wide range of styles and shapes, while
setting minimum standards for life safety,
accessibility, and environmental performance, while
minimizing massing and shadowing impacts on
adjacent properties.
Recommendations
 require a permanent foundation.
 Require that butterfly roofs, flat roofs, or other
similar roof forms where the eave height is also
the maximum height, stay below the average
roof height.
 Allow mixed roof forms if they fit underneath
a height envelope defined by the peak and
average heights.
 Permit basements and count them toward the
sites total far.
 Require basements to have a minimum 2.44m
(8) ceiling height.
 Permit crawl spaces in alignment with the citys
zoning bylaw.
 Allow a maximum depth below adjacent grade
of 1.83m (6).
Intent
to ensure that design and construction practices
reflect a commitment to climate action and help
meet the citys greenhouse gas emissions reduction
targets.
Recommendations
 require laneway homes to meet the citys
energy step code targets.
Heritage
intent
to ensure the implementation of the laneway
housing program supports protection of the citys
heritage buildings.
Recommendations
 do not provide additional far if the principal
dwelling is listed on the heritage registry
and demolished as part of a site-wide
redevelopment.
54
interface with lane or street lighting
intent
to create an inviting lanescape that improves the
beauty, safety, and environmental quality of the
lane.
Recommendations
 where an entry door faces the lane, provide a
minimum 1.52m (5) setback.
 Provide glazing on a minimum of 10% of the lane
elevation.
 Provide lane plantings in areas not utilized for
parking or pathways.
 For corner lots, require the laneway home to
have a door or highly visible entrance path from
the flanking street.
Intent
to minimize excessive lighting of exterior facades to
reduce impacts on neighbours and the environment
at night, while providing for safety and security.
Recommendations
 require exterior lights more than 2.44m (8)
above grade to be down-lights only.
Privacy and overlook
intent
to minimize opportunities for direct overlook from
upper floor windows and balconies into adjacent
rear yards.
Recommendations
 face balconies toward the lane.
 For upper floor windows oriented toward
adjacent residential yards, require a sill height
greater than 1.52m (5) or to be translucent
glazed.
Adaptable/accessible units
intent
to incentivize the creation of homes that are
fully accessible, adaptable / visitable, or able
to be occupied on just one level in a two-storey
configuration.
Recommendations
 provide a three-piece bathroom on the main
floor of the laneway home.
 Encourage the provision of a clear, smooth path
of access to the laneway. Use a ramp rather than
stairs.
 Encourage diverse accessible and adaptable
design strategies, including more open concept
layouts that reduce the number of walls and
posts, and include 863.6mm (34) clear interior
doors, lever handles, powered entry door
openers and gates, and interior lifts.
 Consider excluding space for interior elevators
or lifts from the sites total far.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 55
identification and access
intent
to provide fire and emergency access and clear
addressing from the street.
Recommendations
 require a continuous fire access path that is
a minimum of 0.91m (3) wide, with minimum
1.98m (6-6) overhead clearance. The surface
of the access path should be concrete or
interlocking pavers, with no flagstones or
intermittent pavers that might provide a tripping
hazard. Specifications to be verified with the
city's fire department.
 Provide an address number that is a minimum
of 152.4mm (6) high and visible from the street.
Provide a mailbox, visible from the street,
adjacent to the address numbers or with
numbers on the mailbox.
 Provide a dedicated exterior door to the
secondary suite. Entrances should be
welcoming and weather protected.
Suites in semi-detached
homes
zoning and lot suitability
intent
to enable secondary suites in semi-detached
homes to be a viable option on as many residential
lots as possible.
Recommendations
 allow secondary suites in conjunction with a
semi-detached home in all zoning districts that
permit two-family residential use.
 Lots should have driveway access to the rear or
side of the property via a lane or street.
Tenure
intent
to ensure secondary suites in semi-detached
homes help increase the supply of rental housing in
neighbourhoods across burnaby.
Recommendations
 require secondary suite occupancy to be rental
only.
 Align secondary suites in semi-detached homes
implementation with the city of burnabys
regulations for short term rentals.
 Owner would not be required to live on the
property.
56
the above rendering highlights various design considerations for suites in semi-detached homes,
including parking requirements, private outdoor spaces, waste and recycling, and rainwater infiltration.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 57
parking
intent
to provide sufficient infrastructure to accommodate
a range of mobility needs, including a personal
vehicle.
Recommendations
 require two on-site vehicle parking pads for four
residential units (minimum 2.74m (9) x 6.1m (20)
each, in an open pad or carport) perpendicular
to the lane, with electric vehicle charging
infrastructure roughed in.
 This requirement may be reviewed
following completion of burnabys citywide parking review.
Rationale
residential sites with a lane have the opportunity
for vehicle parking on private property as well
as street parking at the front. On a 30 lot, which
is the smallest lot width in burnaby, there is
space for approximately two parking spaces at
the curb, and one to three parking spaces at
the lane. Renters have relatively lower rates of
personal vehicle ownership so will have lower
parking requirements.
Intent
to provide open space, private outdoor space, and
landscaping suitable for the number of residential
units on site. To improve environmental factors such
as increased biodiversity, decreased urban heat
island effect, and increased rainwater infiltration.
Recommendations
 allow a maximum of 70% impermeable
area, including all buildings, patios/decks,
impermeable driveways, and pavers.
 This requirement aligns with the citys
zoning bylaw. Consider reducing
maximum impermeable area to 60%
during future phases of the housing
choices program.
 Require private outdoor space for the secondary
suite in the form of a minimum 4m2 (43sf) patio
with a minimum dimension of 1.5m (5).
Landscaping, permeability, and
private outdoor space
intent
to allow a wide range of sizes, from studio to family
sized, with additional floor area beyond what is
currently allowed for the principal dwelling.
Recommendations
 count all habitable space toward the sites total
far.
 Do not require a maximum secondary suite size,
as per the bc building code.
 Consider offering additional density for semidetached units with secondary suites. An
additional 0.10-0.15 far would support this form
of housing in all neighbourhoods.
Size
58
the above rendering explores how access and dedicated outdoor spaces can
contribute to the identity and and livability of suites in semi-detached homes.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 59
intent
to ensure secondary suites are as livable as
possible, with access to natural light and views to
the outdoors.
Recommendations
 allow a maximum depth below adjacent grade
to be 1.5m (5)
 consider guidelines for minimum ceiling heights.
 Require that each room has at least one window
that receives direct natural light.
 Encourage the use of window wells and patio
areas to enhance access to direct natural light.
Height / depth
intent
to ensure that design and construction practices
reflect a commitment to climate action and help
meet the citys greenhouse gas emissions reduction
targets.
Recommendations
 require secondary suites in semi-detached
homes to meet the citys energy step code
targets.
Building performance
intent
to create an inviting streetscape that improves the
beauty, safety, and environmental quality of the
street.
Recommendations
 require that the suite entry be visible from the
street.
 Require that the suite entry is no more than 5
below grade.
 Encourage decorative landscaping, walkway
lighting, and a dedicated pathway.
Interface with the street
the above diagram represents some of the suites in semidetached home design options that were used to inform and
inspire discussions in community workshops.
60
photo credit: lanefab.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 61
5
implementation
62
photo credit: lanefab.
63
in addition to the planning and design
recommendations outlined in the previous section,
there are a number of actions that the city can
undertake to support successful implementation of
the housing choices program for laneway homes
and suites in semi-detached homes. Informed by
insights gleaned from stakeholders who design,
build, and develop these housing types, additional
recommended actions are outlined to the right.
Implementation city of burnaby actions
we heard in the engagement process with
industry experts and residents that there is a strong
desire for quick and efficient implementation of
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes across burnaby. This section outlines some
recommendations that aim to increase the success
of implementation.
Program implementation
 immediately implement the program for
laneway homes and secondary suites in semidetached homes.
 After a period of two years  or after a certain
number of laneway homes and suites in semidetached homes are constructed  undertake
a review of its performance. Account for new
directions in the citys new official community
plan, which is currently under review.
 Approve laneway homes and secondary suites
in semi-detached homes through a standard
building permitting process, with limited
opportunities to vary requirements through
development variance permit (dvp) processes.
The city should develop clear guidelines for
relaxations that would be supported.
 The city should create clear guidelines for
owners of character and heritage homes to
access incentives and relaxations.
64
pre-approved designs
 if a project has been permitted under the
standard building permit path, make it available
as a quicker approval option.
 Explore the creation of an online portal with preapproved designs that could be obtained and
approved through a quicker permitting process.
Simplified development requirements
 limit the need for applications to be approved
by council or through the board of variance,
or to have to undertake neighbour notification
processes.
 Limit requirements to produce a landscape plan
as part the permitting process.
 Develop a simplified tree removal process that is
predictable and comprehensive.
 For servicing costs for laneway homes, consider
a similar approach as the citys secondary suite
requirements.
Construction practices
 to reduce embodied emissions (emissions
associated with materials and construction
processes), ensure that it is easier to build above
grade than below grade.
 Explore opportunities to design and build
laneway homes converted from garages or
existing structures.
Other policies with potential broader application
explore opportunities to develop policies for
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes that could also be applied more broadly
to all residential building types across the city. For
example:
energy efficiency
 support additional floor area ratio (far)
or financial incentives for high performance
buildings for all low-rise residential forms. This
includes homes achieving passive house, net
zero, or bc energy code step 5.
Rainwater management
 ensure that all future residential development
meet minimum rainwater infiltration and capture
requirements.
 If considerable rainwater storage tanks (1000
gallons or more) are provided, offer a reduction
on storm connection fees or a rebate on
permitting.
Accessibility
 develop detailed criteria for building design
relaxations that demonstrate accessibility
criteria.
 Identify minimum design guidelines for all
residential buildings, including considerations
for entranceways, space requirements, and
adaptable features.
 Include exemptions for buildings with a main
floor below 600ft2
.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 65
next steps
6
66
photo credit: lanefab.
67
this program recommendations report is intended
to inform development of more detailed regulations
for laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes.
City staff will provide this report to burnaby city
council for their review, and will also provide
the results of a financial analysis that is currently
underway. Based on council direction, staff may
undertake further technical reviews to develop
a draft program for laneway homes and suites in
semi-detached homes. Upon completion of a draft
program, staff anticipate hosting a series of open
houses to get feedback on the program, prior to
finalization of the program and necessary bylaws.
Next steps
68
burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 69
future
considerations
7
70
71
as noted in part 5, there are limited opportunities to
vary requirements for laneway homes and suites in
semi-detached homes. Should the city of burnaby
choose to develop clear guidelines for relaxations
that would be supported through the development
variance permit (dvp) process, the following
considerations could be made and/or adapted:
future considerations
laneway homes
 sites without lanes  laneway homes may be
located on a lot without a lane following a more
comprehensive review by the city and provided
other intents are met.
 Siting  laneway home may be located in a
side yard or front yard, provided all other intents
are met.
 Parking  for corner sites and sites adjacent to
parks, the minimum parking requirement may
be reduced to zero due to the availability of
more parking in those locations (compared to
mid-block sites). Likewise, parking requirements
may be reduced to zero if the site is within 400m
of frequent transit.
 Private outdoor space  private outdoor
space requirements may be relaxed provided
the intent is met via other means on site. For
example, accessible green roofs or larger
shared outdoor spaces could contribute to the
sites approach to open space.
 Coverage  site coverage may be relaxed to
50% with supporting strategies that demonstrate
an acceptable level of rainwater infiltration on
site (e. G. Green roof) or otherwise reduce site
runoff (e. G. Low-flow toilets).
 Trees  where possible, existing large trees
could be retained by granting conditional
relaxations to setbacks and site coverage. If
the canopy/root zone of trees being retained
intersect with the building footprint, sewer
excavation, or access path from the front
property to the laneway home, an arborist
should be retained to provide a retention plan
and to supervise the excavation.
 Privacy and overlook  balcony locations and
window details may be relaxed if meeting the
intent.
 Lighting  lighting details may be relaxed if
meeting the intent.
 Accessibility  bathroom requirements may
be relaxed for small unit sizes (600 ft2
or less) or
where site conditions would make a main floor
bathroom untenable.
72
suites in semi-detached homes
 parking  for corner sites and sites adjacent to
parks, the minimum parking requirement may
be reduced to zero due to the availability of
more parking in those locations (compared to
mid-block sites). Likewise, parking requirements
may be reduced to zero if the site is within 400m
of frequent transit.
Burnaby housing choices program recommendations report 73
thank you

September 2022
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes
engagement summary report
city of burnaby
housing choices
2
table of contents
executive summary
introduction
1. Community workshop
2. Virtual workshops
3. Other input
4. Next steps
appendix a - community workshop
appendix b - virtual workshops
appendix c - email correspondence
6
10
12
32
40
44
burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 3
the above rendering illustrates a future vision for laneways in burnaby, where diverse housing choices
foster a vibrant public realm and support the community's broader goals. This vision was inspired by
conversations with community members through a variety of engagement activities.
4
burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 5
executive summary
since 2019, the city of burnaby has conducted
extensive public engagement on housing, shedding
light on our community's needs and priorities.
Building on these community conversations, the city
launched an engagement campaign for its housing
choices program that specifically focused on the
planning, design, and implementation of laneway
homes and suites in semi-detached homes. It
included a public online survey, a virtual workshop
targeting industry partners, in-person and virtual public
workshops, and a drop-in public open house.
6
who we reached
over 250 people registered across 4 workshops, with
an estimated additional 100 participants attending
the drop-in open house component of the in-person
workshop. In addition, a total of 2,550 respondents
completed the public housing choices survey. The
engagement process involved conversations with a
diverse group of residents from a wide range of ages,
family structures, and lived experiences.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 7
what we heard -
overall emerging themes
during public engagement, we received a diverse
range of perspectives and insights on the challenges
and opportunities of housing in burnaby. The most
prominent themes we heard from residents were as
follows:
flexibility  no one approach fits all
participants supported a diversity of options for
laneway homes  including number of storeys,
building heights, parking, setbacks, forms, rooflines,
outdoor spaces, landscaping, entrances, and more.
Participants often highlighted the need to respond to
site constraints, including topography, neighbouring
properties, and lot configurations. For both laneway
homes and secondary suites, there was support to
provide some guidelines and regulations to help
achieve city and community priorities, with enough
flexibility to allow for creative solutions and designs
that meet the needs of residents.
Optimization  make the best use of space and resources
participants supported efficient approaches that
considered both maximizing living space and
advancing other community priorities. Potential
solutions included cantilevered designs that provide
floor space above open parking, take advantage of
sloped properties, and use flat roofs as private outdoor
spaces. There was general support for higher building
heights (2-3 storeys), to allow for more open space
particularly on smaller lots, while encouraging larger
one-storey accessible units on larger lots. Participants
highlighted the importance of balancing the provision
of new housing with retaining and restoring green
spaces, as well as ensuring buildings are efficient and
adopt a holistic approach to climate action.
Suitability  diverse needs require diverse solutions
similar to the theme around flexibility, participants
voiced a desire to have specific solutions for their
unique needs for both laneway homes and secondary
suites. For example, multi-generational homes
may have different considerations for privacy and
shared outdoor spaces, including approaches to
the placement of windows and setbacks between
units. Another example is the suitability of spaces to
meet peoples unique accessibility needs, in which
(for example) the bedroom and kitchen could all be
located on the same floor and accessed at grade with
a no-step entrance.
Expediency  make the development process
easy and keep it simple
participants shared a sense of urgency to ensure
more diverse housing options are implemented in
burnaby as soon as possible. Participants would like to
see a streamlined approvals process  such as preapproved designs and reduced development process
requirements  in order to increase certainty, improve
efficiency, and decrease the likelihood of delays and
rising costs.
8
burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 9
engagement objectives
the overarching objectives for this engagement were
to:
 launch the housing choices engagement process;
 refine the specific program recommendations
for laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes to be presented to council; and
 establish a foundation for future phases of the
housing choices program.
Phase 1a of the housing choices program will introduce laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes
across burnaby. This will be followed by more dense forms of missing middle housing in phases 1b and 2.
Introduction
phase 1a phase 1b
laneway homes and suites
in semi-detached homes
homes with two suites and
fourplexes
to foster a shared understanding for the future of
infill housing in burnaby, this process gathered input
from residents, the development industry, and other
stakeholders to develop program recommendations.
The engagement process was designed in a way that
acknowledges that: people deserve to be part of the
planning processes that affect their lives; people are
experts in their own lived experiences and therefore
have inherent expertise to share; and peoples input
strengthens the plan and planning process.
10
engagement activities
the design and planning of engagement activities
were informed by outcomes from the housing choices
public survey on preferences related to laneway
homes and suites in semi-detached homes, research
on best practices from other municipalities, and
engagement with various city of burnaby departments.
To support diverse forms of participation, both inperson and virtual workshops were facilitated, with 3
workshops open to the general public and 1 workshop
hosted specifically with members of the development
industry.
Phase 2 mid-rise buildings
full range of missing middle
housing
"missing middle housing" provides
multiple units on the same lot, either
clustered, stacked, in a row, or in a
single building. The scale of missing
middle housing is smaller than mid-rise
or high-rise apartment developments,
and is compatible with single family
neighbourhoods. Examples of missing
middle housing may include duplexes,
triplexes, fourplexes, sixplexes, courtyard
clusters, rowhomes, and low-rise
apartments, and accessory units such as
flex suites, secondary suites and laneway
homes.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 11
1
community
workshop
community workshop
overview
in-person community workshop and drop-in public
open house
an in-person community workshop was hosted on
june 22nd, 2022 at the bonsor recreation complex.
A total of 105 participants registered for this event.
This workshop was facilitated using smaller group
discussions, with tables of 10 participants offering
input on preliminary design options as well as their
preferences related to example projects. This input
was captured using interactive worksheets, which
prompted participants to share what was working
well, what needed to be improved, and what required
further exploration.
The facilitated portion of the workshop was
complemented by a drop-in open house at the same
venue, where panels offered background information,
a summary of results from the online survey,
preliminary design options, and a selection of project
examples. The general public was encouraged to
provide input on the boards and city of burnaby staff
were available to answer any questions.
14
an example workshop activity sheet, which presented a range of potential design options including key
considerations. Participants reviewed and responded to each design option, noting which elements were working
well, which needed improvement, and what required further exploration.
All completed worksheets from the workshop can be found in appendix a.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 15
what we heard - overall
implementation of the housing choices program
many workshop participants shared either a personal
interest in building a laneway home, or a desire to live
in one in the future. Residents often communicated a
sense of immediacy in wanting to see laneway homes
built in the near future, including through an efficient
approvals process. They offered various strategies
to achieve this, including limiting public consultation
for every project, providing pre-approved designs for
laneway homes, supporting pre-fabricated options, and
reducing the length and complexity of the permitting
process.
Affordability and feasibility
related to program implementation, participants
shared a desire for laneway homes and suites in
semi-detached homes to address affordability. Ideas
that were shared included reduced permitting and
servicing costs, as well as flexible design options
depending on homeowner preference and lot
constraints. Participants also highlighted a desire for
clarity through the approvals process, ensuring welldefined parameters and predictable expectations for
what is permitted..
Future program phases
to ensure an engaged discussion, the workshop
focused on the first phase of the housing choices
program; however, through these conversations,
participants often shared an interest in housing
options beyond laneway homes and secondary suites,
including fourplexes and opportunities to build two
laneway homes, particularly on larger lots.
Simple design approaches
participants often favoured design options and
example projects that were simple in nature, with a
recognition that all options should be allowed if they
meet certain program requirements. Some participants
shared an interest in laneway home design options
that complement existing dwellings, while others
recognized the importance of allowing flexibility and
creativity in the design process.
Livable design
in sharing their input on design options and example
projects, residents often favoured design features
that supported livability, including but not limited to:
access to natural daylight; generous windows; private
green spaces; and high ceiling heights. Residents also
highlighted a broader support for livability, including
multi-generational homes, diverse and inclusive
communities, and social and resilient neighbourhoods.
Accessibility
residents often identified the importance of accessible
options for diverse and aging populations. Participants
particularly valued at grade, no-step entrances, with
a general appreciation for one-storey laneway home
options and above grade suites in semi-detached
homes. Some participants shared concerns about onestorey laneway homes having too large of a footprint
and over-contributing to lot coverage on smaller lots..
Permeability and green space
participants often favoured examples that included
more green space and disliked options that showed
too much paved area. Trees, shrubs, and plantings
were often identified as positive design elements,
and design options that preserved open space and
supported rainwater infiltration were also favoured.
16
the above graphic was created with input from diverse
conversations with residents during the in-person workshop.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 17
what we heard -
laneway homes
flexibility
participants often shared an interest in allowing a
range of design options, depending on the size and
configuration of the lot, and the preferences of the
homeowner. Participants recognized that each option
will likely include trade-offs, with an appreciation for
a variety of diverse configurations. Some residents
shared that there should be different rules for different
lot types, including corner lots where side entrances
and private outdoor spaces may be more appropriate.
Further, multiple participants indicated that one storey
larger footprint laneway homes should be encouraged
on larger lots.
Parking
residents shared mixed responses to the number of
on-site parking spaces being shown within design
options. There was general support to not include
parking ratios, with multiple groups identifying at least
one covered parking space as an appropriate amount,
and multiple comments that design options showing
three parking spaces were too many. There was strong
support for carports and cantilevered designs that
provide covered parking spaces with the opportunity
to use the second floor for living or outdoor space.
Some residents also shared that the number of parking
spaces should depend on proximity to transit, where
areas better served by transit could reduce parking
requirements.
Outdoor space
there were mixed comments related to the siting of
a laneway home's outdoor space. Some identified a
preference for side and rear yard spaces, while others
appreciated options that showed a setback yard facing
the lane. Some shared concern around the impact of
this configuration on the principal dwelling's outdoor
space and privacy. There was strong interest in
utilizing rooftops for private outdoor space. Separation,
privacy, and orientation of open areas were highlighted
as important qualities to consider when planning and
designing these spaces.
The above diagram illustrates one design option
that included a patio set back from the lane.
18
size and form
there was general support for more living space and
design options that maximized the amount of livable
floor area. Examples included cantilevered designs
or options that had larger footprints. There was
general support for options that included a second
storey that was the same size as the first. Some
participants shared a preference for the allowable size
of a laneway home to not be tied to the area of the
existing building. Participants also expressed approval
for allowing laneway homes on heritage home lots
to have additional floor area allowances. Participants
appreciated the character of dormer windows and
sloped roofs, however also recognized that simpler
forms could be more efficient for interior living space.
There was general appreciation for flat roofs for their
ability to provide additional usable outdoor space.
Participants often appreciated examples where the
laneway home looked 'like a home' or had enough
presence to be perceived as a primary residence.
Height
overall, there was general support for laneway homes
with more than one storey. Participants recognized the
importance of understanding neighbourhood context,
with an appreciation for thoughtful and creative design
considerations that mitigate overlook and privacy
concerns. For example, partially below grade first
floors could allow for higher ceiling heights and two
storeys, while limiting the overall impact of the laneway
home. Related, some participants shared a preference
to limit the amount of below grade living space so as
to avoid residents living in spaces with limited natural
light.
In reviewing visual preferences, some participants
shared that three storey options were potentially too
tall, while some participants were concerned about
the height of the laneway home in proportion to
the principal dwelling. Overall, there was a general
preference to preserve open space and maximize
livable area, which may require taller laneway homes.
Setbacks and siting of laneway home
residents shared a wide range of opinions around
minimum setbacks from the laneway, neighbouring
properties, and principal dwelling. Some participants
appreciated maximizing the available living space by
reducing setbacks, while others shared a preference
to not have the laneway home be as wide as the lot
itself. Participants often highlighted the opportunity to
reduce the front yard setback of the principal dwelling
to optimize a site's overall open space. Reduced
setbacks were also viewed as more appropriate in
urban areas with smaller lots, and less appropriate in
less urban areas with larger lots. Many participants
preferred to locate the laneway home along one edge
of the property (particularly on larger lots) to maximize
outdoor green space and reduce the visual impact of
the building. Zero lot line / no setback conditions will
require further analysis of servicing needs and impacts
on neighbouring properties; however, there is general
support at a discretionary level.
Windows
there was some support for options that allow the
placement of windows on all sides of the home, while
others shared concerns around privacy for balconies
and windows facing the lane and neighbouring
properties.
Servicing
some participants shared an interest in the opportunity
to connect services such as water to the main house
to reduce the cost of building a laneway home. There
were questions regarding the placement of waste and
recycling facilities, with a general interest in seeing
dedicated spaces for waste bins. There were also
multiple comments in support for requiring electric
vehicle charging.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 19
storage
there was general support for storage in cellar
and basement spaces as well as for providing bike
storage, with the option to exempt this space from the
allowable floor area.
Landscape design and permeability
there was strong support for green roofs, permeable
pavers, and low maintenance xeriscaping. Many
participants appreciated laneway home concepts
which featured green areas and private outdoor
spaces, but recognized that homeowners should
ultimately decide on the amount and type of
landscaping.. The provision of green space between
laneway homes was viewed as important, as well
as plantings along the lanemany examples were
'loved' for their inclusion of landscaping that softens
this edge. Several participants mentioned including
minimum tree requirementsespecially if any existing
trees are removed through the construction process.
Participants also often liked laneway home examples
that included fencing and screening for privacy.
Presence in the lane
many residents shared a desire for laneway homes
to be designed as welcoming spaces, including
considerations for windows facing the lane, diversity
of forms, and material selection. Through reviewing
example projects, participants often shared a visual
preference for options that do not look like garages,
minimizing the visual presence of space dedicated to
vehicles. Participant also shared an interest in seeing
social spaces facing the laneway to activate the public
realm.
The following pages highlight some of
the representative input received from
the community workshop.
20
these illustrations were created
to visually represent the ideas,
experiences, and preferences of
workshop participants.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 21
participants often loved this example, highlighting the visual
appeal of the laneway home's height and size, the subtle
location of parking, use of natural materials, provision of big
windows and spaciousness of form.
This example was often identified as potentially too tall
and out of character with the main house. Participants also
appreciated the amount of living space that a three-storey
laneway home could provide.
22
this laneway home was often favoured for its visual appeal,
including the site's landscape design, outdoor spaces, and
form. Solar panels were also often identified as a positive
design feature. Some participants disliked the lack of privacy
and noted that this example would likely include a higher
construction cost.
This example was often loved for its efficient use of an
existing slope and many desirable features, such as a
second floor patio, integrated parking, and generous living
space..
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 23
one-storey laneway homes were often appreciated for their
potential to provide accessible housing to diverse residents.
This example was also favoured for its style and inner yard
green space,
laneway home examples above garages were often
disliked for their use of stairs to access the unit, however
some participants appreciated the simplicity of this design
configuration.
24
this laneway home was often favoured by participants for
its balance of privacy and openness, as well as approach to
parking,
this example was often favoured for its compact form and
height, attractive roofline, and potential for accessibility.
Some participants disliked the limited green space and
smaller living space provided.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 25
these examples were often disliked for their garage-like
appearances, with participants noting how the dominance of
the garage door and limited windows can create uninspiring
and potentially uninviting laneway spaces.
26
what we heard - suites in semidetached homes
although many of the themes related to laneway
homes are applicable to suites in semi-detached
homes, some themes emerged related to this specific
form of housing:
access
there was general support for entrances to the
various units to be staggered or in separate locations
where the suite entrance would be in the side or
rear of the home. This would also apply to secondary
suite entrances that step down to a private patio.
Participants recognized that the way suites are
accessed should be informed by design and site
constraints, where each entrance should have their
own identity. Participants described this quality as
cohesive but separate - where a secondary suite
entrance is blended into the design of the semidetached home. There was a general desire for
access to both semi-detached homes and secondary
suites to be identifiable from the street, with highly
visible pathways.
Outdoor space
there was general support to encourage private
outdoor spaces, with input ranging from minimum
outdoor space requirements, to enabling the
homeowner to decide the amount and location of
dedicated outdoor space.
Some participants identified the opportunity for
outdoor space to be designed to offer privacy for
the secondary suite, supporting visual interest and
personal space. Multiple participants suggested ideas
to include an accessible rooftop patio or garden,
where a ground floor or below grade option is not
feasible.
Other considerations
beyond access and outdoor space, participants
shared preferences related to suites, including general
interest in encouraging accessible options wherever
possible, support for spaces that are livable, including
adequate natural light into units, and a general
preference for flexibility for homeowners to provide
solutions that meet their needs.
The above diagram represents some of the suites in semidetached home design options that were used to inform and
inspire discussions in community workshops.
The following pages highlight some of
the representative input received from
the community workshop.
This example was appreciated for its defined side entrance
that is easily visible from the street, cohesive and welcoming
design approach, efficient use of green space, and
accessible pathway.
This example was often valued for it's "home-like"
qualities, including warm and natural materials, interesting
architectural design, generous greenery, as well as
designated front entrances for both units.
28
this example was often disliked for its institutional or
commercial quality, lack of greenery, and partially below
grade unit. Some participants appreciated this example for
its simple, modern, and functional design.
This example was valued for its private patio, simple design,
and blending of the secondary suite with the main dwelling.
Some participants disliked the limited accessibility due to
the staircase entry, as well as limited green space.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 29
this example was often loved for its greenery, dedicated
outdoor space with seating area, and size of windows.
Participants also noted an appreciation for well defined
entrances that blend in with the main building.
This secondary suite was often loved for its dedicated
private, outdoor covered patio, and variety of planters, some
participants noted concerns around the space being shaded
by the above staircase while others shared a preference
for more green space and materials that allow rainwater
infiltration.
30
the above graphic was informed by input from workshop participants, illustrating a semidetached home with dedicated private outdoor spaces for secondary suites.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 31
2
virtual
workshops
virtual workshops
overview
to complement the in-person workshop, 3 virtual
sessions were hosted using zoom and miro, an online
collaboration platform.
Community workshops
two virtual workshops (june 27 and 29, 2022) offered
an opportunity for residents to learn about the housing
choices program, provide input on preliminary design
options, and share their preferences related to various
example projects. A total of 100 participants registered
across the 2 workshops.
Development industry workshop
to ensure that preliminary design options are
implementable and reflective of industry realities,
a workshop for development industry participants
was hosted on june 20th, 2022, which focused on
opportunities and challenges related to designing,
planning, and building housing in the lower mainland.
A total of 50 participants registered for the event,
and offered a range of experience in the areas
of architecture, planning, finance, real estate and
development, and others. Participants shared their
experiences working in burnaby as well as in other
municipalities in the region.
34
the above graphic summarizes some of the input shared by participants during the workshops,
highlighting the role of housing in supporting the community's broader goals.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 35
what we heard - overall
virtual workshops presented the same information,
including design options and example projects, as the
in-person community workshop. The following themes
emerged through input received from the 3 online
workshops:
flexible solutions
participants often shared a desire for flexibility in
designing and planning both laneway homes and
suites in semi-detached homes. This included
considerations for unit sizes, heights, forms, and
configurations. Residents also valued different options
for diverse tenure situations - for example, a shared
property between family members may benefit from
proportionately more shared space. The development
community reinforced that all design options should be
allowed in order to support diverse housing choices
within burnaby.
Diverse lot options
participants often shared a desire for different
regulations for different lot types. There was a general
interest in seeing more units on larger lots, including
more than 1 secondary suite, multiple laneway homes,
larger units, more than 4 units, and semi-detached
housing with laneway homes. In addition, there was
general interest in providing different access points
and orientation for laneway homes on corner lots.
Livable spaces
participants often valued design options and example
projects that demonstrated elements of a livable
space. These included natural features such as
gardens, shrubs, planters, trees, and green roofs,
which all contribute to the outdoor experience of
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes.
Participants also identified with projects that supported
privacy, including plantings, screening, fencing, and
orientation of the laneway home's main facade. Other
important design elements included generous access
to natural daylight, such as skylights and windows
that run along the top of walls, as well as access to
private outdoor spaces, such as balconies, patios, and
green roofs. Some participants shared a preference
for consistency between the various units on a lot,
while others valued the opportunity for creative design
solutions.
Development process
participants often highlighted the importance of
providing a simple development process that ensures
efficient approvals.
36
what we heard -
laneway homes
parking
in both design options and example laneway homes,
participants shared mixed preferences for the
number of parking spaces required on each lot. Many
participants viewed a minimum of 1 parking space as
appropriate. Participants highlighted the potential to
reduce parking requirements if the property is located
close to transit. Participants also noted that larger lots
which can accommodate more parking spaces also
tend to be further from rapid transit stations. There was
a broad understanding that shifting demand in vehicle
ownership (due to car-sharing, emerging mobility
technologies, working from home trends) may reduce
the need for parking in the future. Some participants
were interested in the opportunity of providing parking
spaces in the front of the principal dwelling.
The development community highlighted that many
interior garages are not being used for parking and
should likely count toward the allowable floor area
of the laneway home. Further, there was a general
recognition that parking spaces interior to the laneway
home would likely limit the ability to share between the
homeowner and tenant.
There was broad support for carports, with the
opportunity to use the roof for green space or private
outdoor space, as well as flexibility for additional
storage if not used for parking vehicles.
Form and size
there was general support for cantilevered design
options that allow for both parking and living space,
or additional parking spaces. Many participants were
interested in maximizing interior living spaces with
general support to explore higher building heights
and allow for more flexible configurations. Some
participants identified the need to build larger units
wherever possible, as smaller units tend to be more
feasible on a range of lot sizes and configurations.
One-storey design options on smaller lots were
viewed as potentially bulky, with some hesitation
around laneway homes on smaller lots and taller
laneway homes. Participants appreciated design
options and example projects that utilized existing
slopes where possible, particularly with the opportunity
to access private outdoor space from upper storeys.
Setbacks
some participants shared concerns around zero lot
line setbacks in terms of servicing and potential impact
on neighbouring properties, while also recognizing that
this would maximize the amount of living space for the
laneway home. Some participants shared the idea to
locate 2 zero lot line laneway homes adjacent to each
other, with private outdoor space on the opposing
side yards. This condition of alternating or varying set
backs could contribute to a visually engaging laneway.
Participants often shared that setbacks should be used
for green space, access, or parking.
Height
there was general support for laneway homes with
more than 1 storey, particularly as a cost-effective
way to provide housing. Some participants identified
the significance of views to the north as an important
consideration when designing and planning laneway
homes.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 37
servicing
participants shared an interest in servicing options
that reduced the cost of constructing laneway homes,
such as allowing connections to the principal dwelling.
Participants often identified the importance of planning
for waste management, including dedicated spaces
and thoughtful locations for garbage and recycling
bins.
Accessibility
participants communicated a desire to encourage
accessible design features, such as no step, wide
entrances, living spaces on the main floor (kitchen,
bathroom, bedroom), and accessible paths of entry;
however, there was general support to allow the
homeowner or developer to decide what to provide in
terms of accessibility. Many participants supported the
idea of encouraging accessible, one-storey laneway
homes on larger lots and to explore additional
accessibility considerations such as including a second
bedroom for a care provider.
Addressing and access
there was general interest to explore addressing
from the lane, with the potential opportunity to provide
efficient emergency service access. There was
variable support for accessing the laneway home from
either the lane or side yard, some participants noted
that many lanes are busy with vehicle traffic, in which
case a side yard entrance may be more appropriate,
or pedestrian safety improvements would be needed
in the lane. Participants recognized that orienting the
main entrance and facade of the laneway home toward
the lane could improve neighbourhood character,
improving safety and fostering vibrant public spaces.
Livable design
there was general support for opportunities that
embed livable design options, such as overhangs to
protect residents from rain and sun, ensuring enough
natural light within units, and providing private outdoor
spaces such as balconies or patios.
Outdoor space
similar to other design considerations, there was
general interest in flexible requirements around
outdoor space requirements for laneway homes,
including how much private outdoor space should
be provided and where. There was some support to
locate private outdoor space abutting the lane rather
than shared with the rear or side yard, to balance
living space, privacy, and personal space. This
condition could potentially require additional height
considerations, including impact on views, shadowing,
and overlook.
There was some interest in opportunities to provide
shared garden space between the laneway home and
principal dwelling. There was strong support for green
roofs, which offer the benefit of cooling in the summer,
rainwater infiltration, and usable private outdoor
space. Overall, there was general interest in retaining
natural ecosystems and supporting biodiversity as a
complement to housing people.
38
what we heard - suites in semidetached homes
access
there was general support to ensure that both
semi-detached homes and secondary suites are
accessed with equal status, including a clearly visible
and accessible path from the street or lane. Some
participants highlighted that if the semi-detached
home is located on a busy road, then access to the
secondary suite should be from the rear of the lot.
There was a desire to build units at grade, where the
secondary suite could be accessed without the use of
stairs. This preference was shared in support of both
accessibility as well as livability. Some residents shared
the importance of considering the existing grade of the
lot, where suites should still provide natural daylight in
to the unit and a general preference for opportunities
to include ramped pathways rather than stairs where
the unit is partially below grade.
Outdoor space
participants shared mixed support for requiring
dedicated outdoor spaces for secondary suites. Some
participants shared the idea to locate the building
closer to the fronting street to maximize outdoor space
in the rear of the lot, which could be shared between
units.
Other considerations
there was general interest from some residents to be
able to build a laneway home on lots that feature a
semi-detached home with a suite.
Privacy and safety
example projects were often appreciated for the
privacy they offered through various design features,
such as careful setbacks and orientation, privacy
screening, or fencing. Some participants shared
concerns regarding windows facing neighbouring
yards, with support for the use of windows that run
along the top of walls, offering access to natural
daylight and limiting overlook. Some participants
shared concerns around existing traffic and safety
related to entrances from the lane, with considerations
for future improvements such as lighting and traffic
calming.
Flexible future development
there was general support for exploring opportunities
to ensure flexible development in the future, such
as prefabricated, modular laneway homes that could
be moved to a different lot, if an area is consolidated
or upzoned to greater allowable densities. There
were various comments and questions regarding
the stratification of laneway homes, including how it
would impact housing affordability and future land
development
storage
there was general support for storage in cellar and
basement spaces, as well as support for providing bike
storage and exempting this from the allowable floor
area.
Burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 39
3
other input
photo credit: lanefab.
Online survey
the city hosted an online survey that asked residents
to share their preferences related to laneway homes
and suites in semi-detached homes. There were 2,550
respondents. The outcomes from this survey provided
a foundation for the exploration of design options and
informed the project teams approach to engaging
residents through the various workshops. A summary
of this engagement activity is available for review on
the project website at: burnaby. Ca/housingchoices.
Burnaby housing choices project email
throughout this process, residents were able to
contact the city directly through the burnaby housing
choices project email (housingchoices@burnaby.
Ca). Approximately 120 items of correspondence from
residents were received since the housing choices
program launched in february 2022, which ranged
from preferences related to site coverage, to questions
on timing of program implementation.
A summary of these correspondence can be found in
appendix c.
42
burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 43
4
next steps
photo credit: lanefab.
Next steps
with the plentiful, diverse, and informed input from
residents of burnaby, the development community, and
city of burnaby staff, the housing choices project team
is developing a series of program recommendations
for laneway homes and suites in semi-detached
homes. These program recommendations will reflect
the ideas, experiences, and preferences that were
shared by participants and will be informed by
additional technical input from the project team, city
staff, and lessons learned from other municipalities.
These recommendations will be used as a foundation
for the city of burnabys zoning bylaw amendments for
laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes,
and may inform future phases of the housing choices
program.
46
burnaby housing choices program engagement summary report 47

Housing choices program:
financial analysis for laneway units and suites in
semis
26 september 2022
prepared for:
city of burnaby
by:
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page i
table of contents
1.0 introduction........................................................................................................... 1
1.1 background...........................................................................................................................1
1.2 professional disclaimer.......................................................................................................1
2.0 concepts and scenarios analyzed ..................................................................... 3
2.1 laneway homes ...................................................................................................................3
2.2 secondary suites in semi-detached units........................................................................4
3.0 laneway housing analysis.................................................................................. 5
3.1 approach...............................................................................................................................5
3.1.1 approach to rental laneway housing analysis....................................................5
3.1.2 approach to strata laneway housing analysis.....................................................5
3.2 key assumptions .................................................................................................................6
3.3 summary of laneway home findings ...............................................................................7
3.3.1 rental laneway unit analysis ...............................................................................7
3.3.2 strata laneway housing analysis .......................................................................10
3.4 experience in other municipalities...................................................................................13
3.5 key findings of laneway analysis ..................................................................................14
4.0 evaluation of secondary suites in semi-detached homes ............................ 15
4.1 approach.............................................................................................................................15
4.2 key assumptions ...............................................................................................................15
4.3 findings...............................................................................................................................16
4.4 implications.........................................................................................................................16
5.0 conclusions ........................................................................................................ 17
6.0 attachments........................................................................................................ 19
6.1 assumptions for laneway financial analysis ................................................................19
6.1.1 revenue assumptions for financial analysis......................................................19
6.1.1.1 strata laneway revenue assumptions............................................... 19
6.1.1.2 rental laneway revenue assumptions .............................................. 20
6.1.2 cost assumptions for laneway financial analysis .............................................20
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page ii
6.1.3 impact of reduction in lot size on value of remainder of single family lot ....21
6.2 detailed laneway financial analysis...............................................................................22
6.3 summary proformas for laneway scenarios..................................................................31
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 1
1.0 introduction
1.1 background
the city of burnabys housing choices program is a multi-phased program to introduce missing middle
housing types to burnabys single and two family neighbourhoods. Missing middle housing can include
ground-oriented forms of housing such as laneway homes, duplexes, houseplexes, townhouses and lowrise
apartment buildings. These infill housing forms can often be introduced into existing single family
neighbourhoods without impacts on neighbourhood character and can provide a variety of significant benefits,
including housing options that are more affordable than new single detached houses, the potential for rental
units, options for existing neighbourhood residents to downsize (freeing up existing housing stock), more
efficient use of land and infrastructure, reduction in energy use, improved public realm, and more walkable
urban areas.
The first phase of burnabys program focuses on laneway homes and secondary suites in semi-detached
homes (suites in semis):
 laneway homes are smaller homes built in the backyard of a main house, facing the lane. Laneway
homes can provide additional space for families or serve as a new source of rental housing while also
providing income for the homeowner.
 Suites in semis are secondary suites in semi-detached (duplex) homes. A semi-detached home could
potentially have two secondary suites, one in each unit. Secondary suites will not be allowed in stacked
duplexes.
A key driver for this program is to increase rental housing and to help address housing affordability by creating
new more affordable housing options. Therefore, where possible, the program is intended to include
measures to support rental housing and minimize any upward pressure on existing property values.
As input to this planning program, the city of burnaby retained coriolis consulting corp. To
1. Analyze the likely financial performance of constructing new laneway units in existing single family zoning
districts in burnaby.
2. Analyze the likely financial performance of constructing suites in semis in existing duplex zoning districts
in burnaby.
3. Determine whether laneway homes on single family lots and suites in semis are likely financially viable
for construction by builders and/or home owners.
4. Evaluate whether these new forms of missing middle housing will likely have impacts on existing property
values in single family and duplex locations in burnaby.
5. Evaluate the financial ability of each type of housing to provide amenity contributions or incorporate below
market housing.
This report provides a summary of our analysis and identifies the key findings and implications.
1.2 professional disclaimer
this document may contain estimates and forecasts of future growth and urban development prospects,
estimates of the financial performance of possible future urban development projects, opinions regarding the
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 2
likelihood of approval of development projects, and recommendations regarding development strategy or
municipal policy. All such estimates, forecasts, opinions, and recommendations are based in part on forecasts
and assumptions regarding population change, economic growth, policy, market conditions, development
costs and other variables. The assumptions, estimates, forecasts, opinions, and recommendations are based
on interpreting past trends, gauging current conditions, and making judgments about the future. As with all
judgments concerning future trends and events, however, there is uncertainty and risk that conditions change
or unanticipated circumstances occur such that actual events turn out differently than as anticipated in this
document, which is intended to be used as a reasonable indicator of potential outcomes rather than as a
precise prediction of future events.
Nothing contained in this report, express or implied, shall confer rights or remedies upon, or create any
contractual relationship with, or cause of action in favor of, any third party relying upon this document.
In no event shall coriolis consulting corp. Be liable to the city of burnaby or any third party for any indirect,
incidental, special, or consequential damages whatsoever, including lost revenues or profits.
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 3
2.0 concepts and scenarios analyzed
2.1 laneway homes
the city completed architectural testing for different laneway home concepts on a variety of different lot sizes.
The concepts considered different design approaches, including single level homes, multi-level homes and
homes with basements. For this analysis, the city asked us to analyze four different assumed laneway home
sizes on different lot sizes ranging from about 4,000 square feet up to about 10,700 square feet. The assumed
laneway home size increase as the lot size increases.
Because market values (rents and sales prices) vary by location, we examined these concepts in different
neighbourhoods to model the potential financial impact of differing market values by location. So, in total we
analyzed seven different case studies that varied by lot size, laneway home size and location, including:
 case study 1 is a 650 square foot laneway home on a 4,359 square foot lot in the 5000 block of norfolk
street. This represents a lower value location for burnaby.
 Case study 2 is a 650 square foot laneway home on a 4,026 square foot lot in the 4100 block of pandora
street. This represents a higher value location for burnaby.
 Case study 3 is a 1,000 square foot laneway home on a 5,550 square foot lot in the 6700 block of fulton
avenue. This represents a lower value location for burnaby.
 Case study 4 is a 1,000 square foot laneway home on a 6,100 square foot lot in the 4000 block of trinity
street. This represents a higher value location for burnaby.
 Case study 5 is a 1,200 square foot laneway home on an 8,052 square foot lot in the 9200 block of 10th
avenue. This represents a lower value location for burnaby.
 Case study 6 is a 1,200 square foot laneway home on a 7,500 square foot lot in the 7200 block of braeside
drive. This represents a higher value location for burnaby.
 Case study 7 is a 1,400 square foot laneway home on a 10,737 square foot lot in the 7500 block of
colleen street. This represents a higher value location for burnaby.
For each of the seven case studies, we analyzed four different scenarios:
 scenario 1 assumes that the new laneway unit is a market rental unit and is built as an infill unit without
any changes to the existing single family home on the lot (infill scenario).
 Scenario 2 assumes that the new laneway unit is a market rental unit and it is built as part of the
redevelopment of the entire lot (i. E. A new single family home and laneway unit are built simultaneously).
 Scenario 3 assumes that the new laneway unit is a market strata (ownership) unit and is built as an infill
unit without any changes to the existing single family home on the lot (infill scenario).
 Scenario 4 assumes that the new laneway unit is a market strata (ownership) unit and it is built as part
of the redevelopment of the entire lot (i. E. A new single family home and laneway unit are built
simultaneously).
Therefore, we analyzed 28 different laneway unit scenarios in total.
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 4
2.2 secondary suites in semi-detached units
for our analysis of secondary suites in semi-detached or duplex projects, we analyzed two different
scenarios1
that varied based on the assumed size of the secondary suite:
 a scenario that assumes a smaller 600 square foot 1 bedroom secondary suite in a new duplex unit.
 A scenario that assumes a larger 900 square foot 2 bedroom secondary suite in a new duplex unit.
1 our analysis focuses on building a suite as part of a new semi-detached project. The financial performance of building a new suite
inside an existing semi-detached unit would vary from property to property depending on a variety of factors such as the age of the
existing building, the extent to which code upgrades are required, and the existing design/layout of the unit.
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 5
3.0 laneway housing analysis
3.1 approach
our analysis is designed to test the incremental costs and revenues associated with building a new laneway
unit. So our financial analysis excludes the revenues and costs associated with the new single detached
home (and secondary suite) which is already permitted under current zoning.
The cost of creating the laneway unit, achievable sales prices, and achievable rents are based on market
conditions as of mid-2022.
3.1.1 approach to rental laneway housing analysis
for the rental laneway housing scenarios, we completed the following steps:
1. Estimated the likely total costs of creating the new laneway unit (municipal fees, demolition, site prep,
servicing, hard costs, landscaping, professional fees, soft costs, financing, gst, and other project
costs).
2. Estimated the achievable monthly market rent for the new unit.
3. Estimated the net annual income that would be generated by the new unit (rent less operating costs
and property taxes).
4. Compared the annual net income with the total estimated cost to determine the annual yield (return on
costs). We would expect an annual yield of about 4.5% to 5.0% to be the minimum required from an
investment perspective for this type and scale of project.
5. Estimated the potential additional lot value created by the new laneway housing opportunity, assuming
a builder would accept a profit in the range of 10% to 15% of total costs.
6. Compared the monthly mortgage payment that would be required to finance the entire laneway cost
(under current mortgage rates) with the likely net monthly income.
3.1.2 approach to strata laneway housing analysis
for the strata laneway housing scenarios, we completed the following steps:
1. Estimated the likely total cost of creating the new laneway unit.
2. Estimated the market value for the new unit.
3. Evaluated the impact of the reduced lot size on the market value of the remainder of the single family
lot (even though permitted floorspace for the new single family home does not decline, the smaller lot
size will negatively impact the single family house and lot value).
4. Estimated the profit margin on total costs (including the reduced lot value of the remaining lot).
5. Estimated the potential additional lot value created by the new strata laneway housing opportunity,
assuming a builder would accept a profit in the range of 10% to 15% of total costs.
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 6
3.2 key assumptions
attachment 6.0 summarizes the detailed financial assumptions used in our analysis. Other key assumptions
used for both the rental and strata laneway housing analysis are as follows:
1. The analysis assumes that the city changes the zoning of properties in advance (pre-zone) so that
builders are not required to rezone.
2. The floorspace for new laneway unit does not reduce the permitted floorspace for the main single family
home. The laneway unit floorspace is additional permitted density on the site.
3. A secondary suite would also still be permitted in the main single family home.
4. Municipal connection fees would apply to the new laneway unit if built as an infill unit. However, these
are allocated to the new single family home in scenarios that involve full redevelopment of the lot.
5. Municipal dccs are not required as there are fewer than four units on the lot2
.
6. Burnaby would not require any significant off-site servicing or infrastructure upgrades to create the new
laneway unit.
7. The laneway unit is treated as a market priced unit. No affordable units are included in the analysis.
8. No amenity contributions are required from the builder.
2
if the city elects to implement a dcc for laneway homes, it would likely have a minor negative impact on the findings of our analysis
as it would account for a small share of overall project costs.
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 7
3.3 summary of laneway home findings
our detailed financial analysis for the rental laneway scenarios is included in attachment 6.0. This section
summarizes the findings.
We divided the results of our financial analysis into two parts:
 rental laneway unit scenarios.
 Strata (ownership) laneway unit scenarios.
3.3.1 rental laneway unit analysis
this section includes exhibits that summarize the findings of our rental laneway housing analysis. The exhibits
include:
 a brief description of the scenario.
 The location of the lot.
 The existing zoning district.
 The lot size (in square feet).
 The assumed laneway unit size (in square feet).
 The estimated achievable monthly market rent for the new unit.
 The total estimated cost to create the new laneway unit. This varies between the infill scenarios and the
redevelopment scenarios. It is less expensive to construct a new laneway unit as part of the full
redevelopment of the lot where a new single family home is already being constructed than to construct
a new laneway unit while retaining the existing single family home.
 The estimated net annual income that could be generated to the owner by the new laneway unit. The net
income is the gross rent less the operating costs and property taxes associated with the new unit (we
also included a modest allowance for vacancy in this calculation).
 The estimated annual yield to the owner from the laneway unit. This is the net income divided by the total
costs associated with creating the new unit. A yield of at least 4.5% to 5.0% is likely required to make it
attractive to create a new unit from an investment perspective. It is possible this will not be sufficient for
many homeowners as the owner of the single family home will lose the use of their back yard to the
laneway unit so some homeowners may require a higher profit to be interested.
 The potential land value created by the new laneway unit (this is in addition to the existing value of the
property under current use and zoning). This is the market value of the future income stream from the
unit less the costs to create the unit less an allowance for a profit to cover the time and risks associated
with the project. We considered two different profit scenarios for this estimate. A lower profit scenario of
10% on total project costs and a higher profit scenario of 15% on total project costs.
 A comparison of the mortgage payment associated with financing 100% of the laneway unit creation cost
with the net monthly income from the new unit. This shows whether or not the cost of the new unit could
be fully financed through the potential rent, helping facilitate new construction.
 Whether or not the scenario is likely financially attractive for builders or homeowners.
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 8
exhibit 1 summarizes our financial analysis for rental laneway housing scenarios that assume the existing
house is retained and a new laneway unit is added (infill scenarios).
Exhibit 1: summary of infill rental laneway housing analysis
scenario 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
description
small lot in
a lower
value area
small lot in
a higher
value area
mid sized
lot in a
lower value
area
mid sized
lot in a
higher
value area
large lot in
a lower
value area
large lot in
a higher
value area
larger lot in
a higher
value area
block/address
5000 block
of norfolk
street
4100 block
of pandora
street
6700 block
of fulton
avenue
4000 block
of trinity
street
9200 block
of 10th
avenue
7200 block
of braeside
drive
7500 block
of colleen
street
location
douglas
road/
central
burnaby
burnaby
heights
highgate/
edmonds
burnaby
heights
cariboo/
east
burnaby
westridge government
road
zoning district r12 r12 r3 r3 r2 r2 r1
lot size (sf) 4,359 4,026 5,550 6,100 8,052 7,500 10,737
laneway unit size (sf) 650 650 1,000 1,000 1,200 1,200 1,400
assumed monthly rent $2,125 $2,225 $2,850 $3,000 $3,000 $3,150 $3,500
total laneway unit
costs $603,973 $604,016 $699,984 $700,053 $737,712 $737,781 $838,354
net operating income $20,873 $22,049 $28,860 $30,466 $30,513 $32,087 $36,045
annual yield on costs 3.5% 3.7% 4.1% 4.4% 4.1% 4.3% 4.3%
supportable
land value
10%
profit zero zero zero zero zero zero zero
15%
profit zero zero zero zero zero zero zero
estimated monthly
mortgage $3,014 $3,014 $3,493 $3,493 $3,681 $3,682 $4,183
estimated monthly net
income $1,739 $1,837 $2,405 $2,539 $2,543 $2,674 $3,004
net position after debt
service -$1,274 -$1,177 -$1,088 -$955 -$1,138 -$1,008 -$1,180
financially attractive possibly possibly possibly possibly possibly possibly possibly
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 9
exhibit 2 summarizes our financial analysis for rental laneway housing scenarios that assume a new single
family home is built at the same time as the new laneway unit (redevelopment scenarios).
Exhibit 2: summary of rental laneway housing analysis as part of lot redevelopment
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
description
small lot in
a lower
value area
small lot in
a higher
value area
mid sized
lot in a
lower value
area
mid sized
lot in a
higher
value area
large lot in
a lower
value area
large lot in
a higher
value area
larger lot in
a higher
value area
block/address
5000 block
of norfolk
street
4100 block
of pandora
street
6700 block
of fulton
avenue
4000 block
of trinity
street
9200 block
of 10th
avenue
7200 block
of braeside
drive
7500 block
of colleen
street
location
douglas
road/
central
burnaby
burnaby
heights
highgate/
edmonds
burnaby
heights
cariboo/
east
burnaby
westridge government
road
zoning district r12 r12 r3 r3 r2 r2 r1
lot size (sf) 4,359 4,026 5,550 6,100 8,052 7,500 10,737
laneway unit size (sf) 650 650 1,000 1,000 1,200 1,200 1,400
assumed monthly rent $2,125 $2,225 $2,850 $3,000 $3,000 $3,150 $3,500
total laneway unit costs $500,135 $500,178 $572,773 $572,841 $634,412 $634,481 $726,983
net operating income $20,873 $22,049 $28,860 $30,466 $30,513 $32,087 $36,045
annual yield on costs 4.2% 4.4% 5.0% 5.3% 4.8% 5.1% 5.0%
supportable
land value
10%
profit zero zero $4,504 $36,702 zero $12,727 $287
15%
profit zero zero zero $11,411 zero zero zero
estimated monthly
mortgage $2,496 $2,496 $2,858 $2,859 $3,166 $3,166 $3,628
estimated monthly net
income $1,739 $1,837 $2,405 $2,539 $2,543 $2,674 $3,004
net position after debt
service -$756 -$659 -$453 -$320 -$623 -$492 -$624
financially attractive possibly possibly yes yes yes yes yes
the key findings of the rental laneway housing analysis are:
1. Depending on the size of the laneway unit, the total costs of creating a new laneway unit (construction,
soft costs, municipal fees, gst, other costs) will be about:
 $600,000 to $840,000 if the existing home is retained (about 65% of this is hard construction costs).
 $500,000 to $725,000 if a new home is built at the same time as the laneway unit (about 70% of this
is hard construction costs).
2. Current achievable monthly rents are likely in the range of $2,125 to $3,500 per month depending on unit
size and the number of bedrooms.
3. Building a new infill laneway unit is likely to generate a relatively low profit. Therefore, this type of laneway
housing opportunity will likely be primarily of interest to homeowners who are interested in creating
housing to accommodate family rather than homeowners interested in an income producing investment
opportunity.
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 10
4. Building a new laneway unit along with a new single family home performs significantly better than an
infill laneway unit due to reduced costs for the laneway unit if part of a full lot redevelopment3
. This option
is likely financially attractive from an investment perspective in many of the scenarios we analyzed.
5. From an investment perspective, rental laneway units of roughly 1,000 square feet are likely more
attractive than units which are significantly smaller or larger.
6. Rental laneway units are unlikely to create any significant upward pressure on existing single family lot
values.
7. Given that the profitability of building a rental laneway unit is low:
 market rents are likely required in order to make laneway housing development financially attractive
to most homeowners and builders. Laneway unit development is unlikely to be financially viable if
rents are required to be set below market rent.
 Rental laneway units do not have the financial ability to support any significant contributions toward
community amenities.
It is important to note that construction costs in metro vancouver have increased at a relatively rapid pace
during 2021 and 2022. Based on available data and discussions with developers, costs have likely increased
by at least 15% to 20% over the past year or so. It is possible that some of the cost pressures are due to
factors that may be temporary (such as materials cost which can increase or decrease over time).
Therefore, we completed some sensitivity analysis to test the impact of lower construction costs on our
findings. Based on our analysis, even if costs declined by about 10% from current levels (which is likely
optimistic), the key findings of our financial analysis would not change.
3.3.2 strata laneway housing analysis
details about our financial analysis for the strata laneway housing scenarios are included in attachment 6.0.
This section includes exhibits that summarize the findings of the strata laneway housing scenarios. The
exhibits include:
 a brief description of the scenario.
 The location of the lot.
 The existing zoning district.
 The lot size (in square feet).
 The assumed laneway unit size (in square feet).
 The total estimated cost to create the new laneway unit. This varies between the infill scenarios and the
redevelopment scenarios. It is less expensive to construct a new laneway unit as part of the full
redevelopment of the lot where a new single family home is already being constructed than to construct
a new laneway unit while retaining the existing single family home.
 The potential negative impact on the value of the remainder of the single family lot due to the reduction
in lot size. The single family home size will not be reduced, but the yard space and parking area will be
reduced due to the introduction of the new laneway unit (which will be sold off to the laneway owner).
This reduced lot size will negatively affect the value of the remaining single family lot and home.
3 there are construction cost efficiencies associated with building a larger project and some project costs such as connection fees
and servicing could be allocated to the main single family house rather than the laneway unit.
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 11
 the estimated market value of the new laneway unit if sold as a strata unit.
 The profit margin to the builder of the new laneway unit. This is the sales value of the unit less the creation
cost less the impact on the remaining single family lot value. Typically a builder would target a minimum
profit margin in the range of 10% to 15% for this type of project. Some builders would require an even
higher profit margin in order to proceed.
 The potential land value created by the new strata laneway unit (this is in addition to the existing value of
the property under current use and zoning). This is the market value of the unit less the costs to create
the unit, less the impact on the existing single family lot value less an allowance for a profit to cover the
time and risks associated with the project.
 Whether or not the scenario is likely financially attractive for builders or homeowners.
Exhibit 3 summarizes our financial analysis for the strata laneway scenarios that assume the existing house
is retained and a new laneway unit is added (infill scenarios).
Exhibit 3: summary of infill strata laneway analysis
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
description
small lot in
a lower
value area
small lot in a
higher value
area
mid sized
lot in a
lower
value area
mid sized
lot in a
higher
value area
large lot in
a lower
value area
large lot in
a higher
value area
larger lot in a
higher value
area
block/address
5000 block
of norfolk
street
4100 block of
pandora
street
6700 block
of fulton
avenue
4000 block
of trinity
street
9200 block
of 10th
avenue
7200 block
of braeside
drive
7500 block of
colleen street
location
douglas
road/
central
burnaby
burnaby
heights
highgate/
edmonds
burnaby
heights
cariboo/
east
burnaby
westridge government
road
zoning district r12 r12 r3 r3 r2 r2 r1
lot size (sf) 4,359 4,026 5,550 6,100 8,052 7,500 10,737
laneway unit size (sf) 650 650 1,000 1,000 1,200 1,200 1,400
total laneway costs $602,124 $603,456 $702,475 $704,472 $743,269 $745,666 $802,662
impact on remaining
lot value $82,750 $102,750 $92,994 $117,700 $79,294 $108,813 $115,931
strata laneway unit
value $730,000 $780,000 $1,075,000 $1,150,000 $1,260,000 $1,350,000 $1,470,000
profit on costs 7% 10% 35% 40% 53% 58% 60%
supportable
land value
10%
profit zero $2,795 $170,458 $209,802 $304,287 $351,622 $394,284
15%
profit zero zero $130,181 $166,715 $257,078 $301,041 $339,207
financially attractive possibly yes yes yes yes yes yes
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 12
exhibit 4 summarizes our financial analysis for strata laneway scenarios that assume a new single family
home is built at the same time as the new laneway unit (redevelopment scenarios).
Exhibit 4: summary of strata laneway analysis as part of lot redevelopment
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
description
small lot in a
lower value
area
small lot in
a higher
value area
mid sized
lot in a
lower value
area
mid sized
lot in a
higher
value area
large lot in
a lower
value area
large lot in
a higher
value area
larger lot in a
higher value
area
block/address 5000 block of
norfolk street
4100 block
of pandora
street
6700 block
of fulton
avenue
4000 block
of trinity
street
9200 block
of 10th
avenue
7200 block
of braeside
drive
7500 block of
colleen street
location
douglas
road/ central
burnaby
burnaby
heights
highgate/
edmonds
burnaby
heights
cariboo/
east
burnaby
westridge government
road
zoning district r12 r12 r3 r3 r2 r2 r1
lot size (sf) 4,359 4,026 5,550 6,100 8,052 7,500 10,737
laneway unit size (sf) 650 650 1,000 1,000 1,200 1,200 1,400
total laneway costs $503,231 $504,562 $581,321 $583,319 $644,888 $647,285 $697,393
impact on remaining
lot value $82,750 $102,750 $92,994 $117,700 $79,294 $108,813 $115,931
strata laneway unit
value $730,000 $780,000 $1,075,000 $1,150,000 $1,260,000 $1,350,000 $1,470,000
profit on costs 25% 28% 59% 64% 74% 79% 81%
supportable
land value
10%
profit $71,666 $94,496 $285,377 $324,721 $397,605 $444,940 $494,137
15%
profit $44,315 $65,323 $245,100 $281,634 $350,396 $394,359 $439,060
financially attractive yes yes yes yes yes yes yes
the key findings of the strata laneway analysis are:
1. Depending on the size of the laneway unit, the total costs of creating a new laneway unit (demolition, site
prep, construction, soft costs, municipal fees, financing, other costs) will be about:
 $600,000 to $800,000 if the existing home is retained.
 $500,000 to $700,000 if a new home is built at the same time as the laneway unit.
2. Market values for strata laneway units are likely in the range of $730,000 to $1,470,000 depending on
unit size.
3. Building a new strata laneway unit will likely generate significantly profits, even after accounting for the
impact on the value of the main single family lot and house.
4. Building a new strata laneway unit along with a new single family home performs better than an infill
laneway unit.
5. If permitted, strata laneway units will likely create significant upward pressure on existing single family lot
values. The scenarios that we analyzed indicate that lot values could increase by between $40,000 and
$490,000 depending on the location, lot size and permitted size of the strata laneway unit.
6. Given that the profitability of building a strata laneway unit is relatively high:
 strata laneway development would likely be financially attractive if sales prices were restricted to a
below market price (affordable home ownership). However:
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 13
a) the supportable price discount will vary widely depending on the size of the unit and the location
of the property so it will be difficult to apply uniform discount across the entire city.
B) it would be difficult to determine market price if all strata laneway units are sold at below market
prices which would make it difficult to establish the discount to apply to the unit.
C) it would require the creation of an affordable ownership program and ongoing administration and
monitoring by city staff.
 Strata laneway units have the financial ability to support significant contributions toward community
amenities. However:
a) the supportable contribution will vary depending on the size of the unit and the location of the
property so it will be difficult to establish a uniform contribution across the entire city that is viable
for laneway projects. For example, the potential value ranges from $40,000 to $490,000 for the
scenarios we analyzed.
B) amenity contributions are collected upfront by municipalities as part of the approvals process for
a new project. Many single family homeowners may not be able to provide a significant amenity
contribution until after the strata unit is built and sold. Therefore, this would be an obstacle for
homeowners to create new infill strata laneway units. Most interest would likely need to come
from builders who are redeveloping the entire lot and are already financing a larger project.
3.4 experience in other municipalities
strata laneway units (or other types of detached infill strata units) are not common in metro vancouver. When
permitted, strata infill units typically occur in very specific circumstances, such as part of an agreement to
upgrade and retain a heritage home (to provide a financial incentive to retain the existing heritage home).
However, a number of municipalities in metro vancouver permit rental laneway homes, including the city of
vancouver, the city of north vancouver, the district of north vancouver, new westminster, coquitlam and
others. Outside of vancouver (and the city of north vancouver), the rate of rental laneway construction has
been relatively slow.
We completed a high level review of the rate of rental laneway construction in vancouver, the rents being
achieved, and the impact on single family lot prices. Based on our review:
1. Laneway homes have been permitted in vancouver since late 2009. Since then, there has been a
significant amount of rental laneway construction in all neighbourhoods in the city of vancouver. Our
understanding is about 4500 laneway units have been built to date.
2. Vancouver does not regulate the rents in the laneway units. Rents are set at market. This is consistent
with the other metro vancouver municipalities that permit laneway homes.
3. Rental laneway builders in vancouver (and other municipalities) are not required to provide amenity
contributions or density bonus contributions as part of the approval process.
4. The opportunity to build rental laneway homes has not had an upward influence on single family lot
values. Although lot values in vancouver have increased materially since laneway homes were first
introduced, the increase has been due to other market factors:
 we compared the sales prices of newer single family homes in vancouver that include a laneway
home with newer single family homes that do not include a laneway home. After adjusting for house
size, lot size, location and timing, the sales data indicates that the inclusion of a laneway home
increases the overall market value of the property. However, the increase is not greater than the cost
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 14
of creating the laneway home. So this indicates that rental laneway homes in vancouver are not
adding to lot value.
 Single family home prices in vancouver have actually increased at a slower rate in the city of
vancouver than the rest of the lower mainland since laneway homes were first permitted in
vancouver in 2009 (based on data from the real estate board of greater vancouver as of july 2022).
If laneway homes added to lot value, then we would have expected the rate of price growth to have
been higher in vancouver than the rest of the lower mainland.
3.5 key findings of laneway analysis
the key findings of our laneway analysis can be summarized as follows:
1. Under current market conditions, the profitability associated with constructing a new rental laneway unit
in burnaby will likely be modest. Based on our analysis:
 infill rental laneway units (retaining the existing house on the lot) will likely achieve a low profit for
the homeowner. This opportunity will likely be primarily of interest to homeowners who are
interested in creating housing to accommodate family rather than homeowners interested in an
income producing investment opportunity.
 Building a new laneway unit along with a new single family home performs significantly better from
a financial perspective than an infill laneway due to reduced creation costs for the laneway unit
when it is part of a full lot redevelopment. This option is financially attractive from an investment
perspective and we would expect builders to be interested.
 From an investment perspective, rental laneway units of roughly 1,000 square feet are likely more
attractive than units which are significantly smaller or larger.
2. Allowing rental laneway units is unlikely to have any material impact on the value of single family lots.
3. Given that the profitability of building a rental laneway unit is low:
 market rents are likely required in order to make laneway development financially attractive to most
homeowners and builders. Laneway development is unlikely to be viable if rents are required to be
set below market rent.
 Rental laneway units do not have the financial ability to support any significant contributions toward
community amenities.
4. Strata laneway units would be very profitable and attractive from a financial perspective. If permitted,
we would expect interest from homeowners and builders in this option.
5. Allowing strata laneway units would likely create significant upward pressure on single family lot values
unless the city:
 requires a significant amenity contribution as part of the approval for a strata laneway unit.
However, the supportable contribution will vary widely depending on the size of the unit and the
location of the property. In addition, many single family homeowners may not be able to provide a
significant amenity contribution until after the strata unit is built and sold which would create an
obstacle to creating new units.
 Requires the new unit to be sold at a below market price. The supportable price discount will vary
depending on the size of the unit and the location of the property. This approach would require the
creation of an affordable home ownership program as well as ongoing administration and
monitoring by city staff. In addition, it will be difficult to determine market price if all strata laneway
units are required to be sold at below market prices.
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 15
4.0 evaluation of secondary suites in semi-detached
homes
this section summarizes our evaluation of allowing secondary suites in semi-detached and duplex homes.
4.1 approach
our analysis tests the incremental costs and revenues associated with building a new secondary suite in a
semi-detached (duplex) unit. So our financial evaluation excludes the revenues and costs associated with
building the new duplex which is already permitted under current zoning.
The cost of creating the secondary suite and achievable rents are based on market conditions as of mid2022.
We completed the following steps:
1. Estimated the likely total costs of creating the secondary suite.
2. Estimated the achievable monthly market rent for the new unit.
3. Estimated the net annual income that would be generated by the new unit (rent less operating costs
and property taxes).
4. Compared the monthly mortgage payment that would be required to finance the entire secondary suite
cost (under current mortgage rates) with the likely net monthly income.
5. Compared the actual sales prices of new(er) duplex units with secondary suites and new(er) duplex
units without secondary suites in other municipalities (vancouver and city of north vancouver) to
determine if suites increase the price of new duplex units.
6. Identified the implications of secondary suites on:
 duplex unit sales prices.
 Duplex lot values.
 The ability of builders to provide below market rents or an amenity contribution.
4.2 key assumptions
the key assumptions for the secondary suite analysis are as follows:
1. The analysis assumes that the city changes the zoning of properties in advance (prezone) so that
builders are not required to rezone.
2. The secondary suites range from 600 square feet to 900 square feet (within duplex units ranging in size
from about 1200 square feet to 2000 square feet).
3. The floorspace for new secondary suite comes from the density currently permitted for a duplex
building. The city does not increase the permitted floorspace on the lot.
4. The secondary suite is treated as a market priced unit. No affordable units are included in the analysis.
Rents are assumed to range from $1,700 to $1,800 per month for 600 square foot units and $2,400 to
$2,600 per month for 900 square foot units (based on market rents for new(er) secondary suites in
burnaby).
5. Total costs to create the suite as part of a new semi-detached unit range from $60,000 to $80,000
(based on input from builders who are active in burnaby and vancouver).
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 16
6. The costs associated with creating the suite are financed through a mortgage at a rate of 3.5%4
(the
lowest discounted 5 year variable rate available as of august 2022).
7. No amenity contributions are required.
4.3 findings
our analysis indicates that the achievable net operating income for a new secondary suite in burnaby will
significantly exceed the mortgage payments required to finance the full incremental cost of the suite.
Depending on the scenario analyzed, the estimated net monthly income from the suite exceeds the estimated
monthly mortgage payments (at current interest rates) by between $1,100 and $1,900 per month. This
indicates that it is financially attractive to create a secondary suite in a new duplex unit and purchasers of
duplex units could use the income from the suite to help finance part of the overall duplex purchase price.
However, based on actual sales evidence, the potential net income from a secondary suite is unlikely to result
in a significant increase in the sales price of the duplex unit. We examined 258 recent sales of newer duplex
units in the city of vancouver and the city of north vancouver, where suites are permitted in duplex units.
Of these sales, about 108 included suites and about 150 did not include a suite.
After adjusting for location, time of sale and unit size, the sales evidence show that there is no material
difference in the sales price of duplex units with suites and duplex units without suites. In some cases the unit
with a suite sold at a slightly higher price, which makes sense given that there are extra costs to create the
suite. However, in other cases, there was no evidence that the suite increased the sales price.
Duplex units with a suite do not sell for a materially higher price because the purchaser of the unit only has
the use of a portion of the overall unit. So the benefit of the income stream from the suite is offset by the
reduced living area for the owner of the duplex.
4.4 implications
our evaluation indicates that permitting rental suites in semi-detached and duplex units will:
1. Help encourage the creation of new rental housing stock in burnaby.
2. Create a potential income stream that prospective duplex purchasers can use to help them finance a
portion of the duplex purchase price. This will likely help some prospective purchasers fund a duplex
purchase who would not currently be able to afford the duplex.
3. Not lead to any significant increase in duplex sales prices or increased duplex lot values.
4 mortgage rates are currently rising so it is possible that rates will be higher going forward than assumed in our analysis. Higher
borrowing costs will increase the overall cost of creating a new secondary suite if the costs are financed. However, increased rates
will only have a small cost on the overall cost of creating a new secondary suite so higher rates would not change the key findings of
our analysis.
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 17
5.0 conclusions
the key findings of our analysis can be summarized as follows:
1. Allowing laneway units and secondary suites in semi-detached units will increase the rental housing stock
in burnaby and the housing choices for burnaby residents.
2. Under current market conditions, the profitability associated with constructing a new rental laneway unit
in burnaby will likely be modest. Based on our analysis:
 infill rental laneway units (retaining the existing house on the lot) will likely achieve a low profit for
the homeowner. This opportunity will likely be primarily of interest to homeowners who want to
accommodate family members rather than homeowners interested in an income producing
investment opportunity.
 Building a new laneway unit along with a new single family home performs significantly better from
a financial perspective than an infill laneway unit due to reduced creation costs for the laneway unit
when it is part of a full lot redevelopment. This option is financially attractive from an investment
perspective and we would expect builders and homeowners to be interested.
 From an investment perspective, rental laneway units of roughly 1,000 square feet are likely more
attractive than significantly smaller or larger units.
3. Allowing rental laneway units is unlikely to have any material impact on the value of single family lots.
4. Given that the estimated profitability of building a rental laneway unit is relatively low:
 market rents are likely required in order to make laneway development financially attractive to most
homeowners and builders. Laneway development is unlikely to be viable if rents are required to be
set below market rent.
 Rental laneway units do not have the financial ability to support any significant contributions toward
community amenities.
5. Strata laneway units would be very profitable and attractive from a financial perspective. If permitted,
we would expect interest from homeowners and builders in this option.
6. Allowing strata laneway units would likely create significantly upward pressure on single family lot
values unless the city:
 requires a significant amenity contribution as part of the approval for a strata laneway unit.
However, the supportable contribution will vary widely depending on the size of the unit and the
location of the property. In addition, many single family homeowners may not be able to provide a
significant amenity contribution until after the strata unit is built and sold which would create an
obstacle to creating new units.
 Requires the new unit to be sold at a below market price. The supportable price discount will vary
depending on the size of the unit and the location of the property. This approach would require the
creation of an affordable home ownership program as well as ongoing administration and
monitoring by city staff. In addition, it will be difficult to determine market price if all strata laneway
units are required to be sold at below market prices.
7. Allowing rental suites in semi-detached units will:
 help encourage the creation of new rental housing stock in burnaby.
 Create a potential income stream that prospective duplex purchasers can use to help them finance
a portion of the duplex purchase price. This will likely help some prospective purchasers who would
not currently be able to afford a duplex.
 Not lead to any significant increase in duplex sales prices or increased duplex lot values.
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 18
8. Rental laneway units and secondary suites are not well suited to provide below market rental units.
 Our financial analysis indicates that market rents are likely required in order to make laneway
development financially attractive to most homeowners and builders. Laneway development is
unlikely to be viable if rents are required to be set below market rent.
 Many laneway units and secondary suites will likely be occupied by family or relatives of the
property owner, not rented out.
 Requiring below market rents would create ongoing administration and monitoring by city staff,
even though there would only be one potential below market unit per property.
9. The greatest opportunity for affordable housing is through higher density apartment rezonings. It is
possible that other forms of missing middle housing (such as townhouse projects or lowrise apartments)
will create better opportunities for below market units (rental or affordable home ownership). However,
this will depend on the density that the city considers appropriate for these types of missing middle
projects. The higher the permitted density, the greater the opportunity to support a below market
component.
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 19
6.0 attachments
this section includes the following attachments:
 the key financial assumptions used in our laneway financial analysis.
 The detailed proformas for the four scenarios analyzed for one of the case study sites. We have not
included the detailed proformas for all 28 different scenarios at the seven sites that we analyzed.
However, the proformas attached for this one case study site are illustrative of all of the proformas.
 Summary proformas for all 28 laneway scenarios that we analyzed.
6.1 assumptions for laneway financial analysis
the key financial assumptions used in our proforma analysis are based on detailed market research that we
completed mid 2022. The assumptions are summarized below.
6.1.1 revenue assumptions for financial analysis
6.1.1.1 strata laneway revenue assumptions
there is limited sales evidence for sales of stratified laneway units because they are only allowed in a few
municipalities in metro vancouver. To determine the likely sales prices that are achievable for the strata
laneway scenarios, we considered different indicators:
 we examined the sales price (per square foot) of new duplex, townhouse and apartment units in burnaby
by neighbourhood.
 We analyzed sales prices for new(er) detached infill units allowed under the heritage retention program
in vancouver. We compared these strata infill unit sales in vancouver to sales of new(er) nearby
townhouse and duplex sales in vancouver to determine how detached strata unit values compare toe
attached unit values. We then used this comparison to adjust sales of new townhouse and duplex units
in burnaby to estimate the achievable burnaby laneway values. The estimated strata laneway unit sales
prices vary based on neighbourhood and size of the unit. Larger units sell at a higher total price point,
but the sales price per square foot declines as units increase in size.
The units in the scenarios that we tested range from 650 square feet to 1,400 square feet. Based on our
market research, we would expect laneway strata units in this size range in burnaby to sell between about
$730,000 and $1,470,000, or between about $1,050 and $1,200 per square foot.
Exhibit 5 summarizes the strata revenue assumptions for each case study site.
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 20
exhibit 5: sales prices by case study site
site number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
description
small lot in a
lower value
area
small lot in a
higher value
area
medium lot
in a lower
value area
medium lot
in a higher
value area
large lot in a
lower value
area
large lot in a
higher value
area
larger lot in
a higher
value area
laneway size
(sf) 650 650 1,000 1,000 1,200 1,200 1,400
assumed
strata laneway
sales price
$730,000 $780,000 $1,075,000 $1,150,000 $1,260,000 $1,350,000 $1,470,000
assumed sales
price psf $1,123 $1,200 $1,075 $1,150 $1,050 $1,125 $1,050
6.1.1.2 rental laneway revenue assumptions
to determine the likely achievable rents for the rental laneway scenarios, we examined different indicators:
 we reviewed the market rents for new townhouse and apartment units in burnaby by unit size and
neighbourhood.
 We examined rents for new(er) laneway houses in east vancouver and the city of north vancouver
which both have a large inventory of rental laneway units and are in close proximity to burnaby.
The units in the scenarios that we tested range from 650 square feet to 1,400 square feet. Based on our
market research, we would expect units in this size range to rent for between $2,125 and $3,500 per month.
Exhibit 6 summarizes the rental revenue assumptions for each scenario.
Exhibit 6: rental rates by case study site
site number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
description
small lot in a
lower value
area
small lot in a
higher value
area
medium lot
in a lower
value area
medium lot
in a higher
value area
large lot in a
lower value
area
large lot in a
higher value
area
larger lot in
a higher
value area
laneway size
(sf) 650 650 1,000 1,000 1,200 1,200 1,400
assumed
achievable
monthly rent
$2,125 $2,225 $2,850 $3,000 $3,000 $3,150 $3,500
to estimate the completed value of the rental laneway unit, we capitalized the annual net operating income
at 4.5% to estimate the value of the unit to an investor.
6.1.2 cost assumptions for laneway financial analysis
as input to the financial analysis we interviewed multiple builders with extensive experience building new
laneway homes in metro vancouver about the typical costs (under current conditions) to build new laneway
homes. We were also provided detailed budgets from some builders for actual laneway projects that are
underway in vancouver. Based on the information provided by laneway home builders, our analysis makes
the following assumptions about costs:
1. For the infill scenarios, hard construction costs are assumed to range from $400 to $575 per square foot
of gross floorspace depending on the unit size. Costs for smaller units are at the high end of this range
while costs for larger units are at the lower end of this range. The analysis assumes that hard costs for
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 21
laneway homes built simultaneously to a new main single family house are about $25 to $50 lower per
square foot than these figures (depending on unit size).
2. A $50,000 allowance for site work (such as demolition of a garage, recycling, trenching for required
services, excavation) is included. This will vary from lot to lot.
3. Sewer, water and storm connections are assumed to cost $33,600 based on estimates provided by city
of burnaby staff. Connection fees are assumed to be covered by the new main house when the laneway
is built concurrently.
4. A landscaping and fencing allowance of $20,000 is included for the infill laneway and $10,000 if built
along with a new home.
5. Sales commissions on the strata units are assumed to be 7% on the first $100,000 and 2.5% on the
balance (typical mls fees).
6. Project management, contingency, professional fees and other soft costs (permits, engineering, design,
legal, survey, appraisal, accounting, insurance, deficiencies, and other professional fees) range from 15%
to 19% of hard costs.
7. Development cost charges are not required as there are fewer than four units on the lot.
8. Property taxes are based on existing tax rates.
9. A new home warranty fee is included at $3,610 for the strata laneway units, but not the rental units.
10. Gst is calculated at 5% of the rental laneway creation cost.
11. Financing is charged on 75% of costs at 3.5% per year5
. This is currently the lowest discounted 5 year
variable mortgage rate available. In addition, a 1.5% financing fee is included.
12. Property transfer tax on the estimated increased land value supported by the laneway unit is calculated
using the existing property transfer tax rates.
6.1.3 impact of reduction in lot size on value of remainder of single
family lot
the value of a single family lot is comprised partly of the rights to build a single family house and partly of the
yard and lot area that the homeowner enjoys.
For the strata laneway scenarios, a portion of the property will be sold to the strata unit buyer. This will reduce
the lot size that remains for the main single family home which should negatively affect the value of the lot
and home. However, the impact on value will be mitigated because the size of the permitted single family
home will not be reduced. Effectively, the main single family home will be permitted to be the same size, but
it will come with reduced outdoor area.
5 mortgage rates are currently rising so it is possible that rates will be higher going forward than assumed in our analysis. Higher
borrowing costs will increase the overall cost of creating a new laneway unit if the costs are financed. However, increased rates will
only have a small cost on the overall cost of creating a new unit, so higher rates would not change the key findings of our analysis.
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 22
it is challenging to isolate the value of the lot and yard area versus the development rights associated with a
single family home. We do not think it is reasonable to assume that 100% of the value of a lot is attributable
to the development rights, because buyers of lots do tend to use yard space for outdoor amenities (patios,
lawns) or parking. So some of the value is created by the outdoor area at the lot.
To determine the split in value between the lot area and the house size, the ideal approach would be to
examine differences in sales prices for a set of properties with the same house size but different lot sizes. By
deducting the cost of house construction, one could estimate the extra land value attributed to the ability to
build a larger house. However, almost all new single family houses in burnaby are built to the maximum
allowable size for the lot so this type of sales evidence (similar sized new houses on different lot sizes) is not
available.
Our analysis assumes (and we acknowledge that this is approximate) that the impact of the reduced lot area
is equal to about 25% of the value of land (with 75% going the development rights associated with the house).
We also think it is reasonable to assume that that the strata laneway uses about 25% of the existing lot. To
illustrate the impact on the value of the remaining single family lot, we use case study 4 (an old single family
home on a medium sized lot in a higher value area) as an example.
The property is 6,100 square feet, zoned r3 and currently assessed at $1,885,000 (mostly land value). The
simple way to account for the impact is to estimate the reduced value of the property as a 4,575 square foot
lot (25% smaller). However this would overstate the impact because the existing homeowner maintains their
existing development rights. The development rights for the laneway are allowed on top of the existing single
family density.
For case study 4, using our approach, the impact can be calculated as $309 per square foot of site area
multiplied by 25% (value of outdoor space) multiplied by the site area lost to the laneway (1,525 square feet)
equals about $118,000 of impact. As the location and lot sizes of the case study sites differ the impact also
varies across case study sites.
6.2 detailed laneway financial analysis
our analysis included 28 different proformas so we have not included all of the detailed proformas in this
report. However, to illustrate the approach to the analysis, this section includes the detailed proformas for
case study site 4. It includes four proforma scenarios for site 4.
 Scenario 1 assumes that the new laneway unit is a market rental unit and it is built as an infill unit without
any changes to the existing single family home on the lot.
 Scenario 2 assumes that the new laneway unit is a market rental unit and it is built as part of the
redevelopment of the entire lot (i. E. A new single family home and laneway unit are built simultaneously).
 Scenario 3 assumes that the new laneway unit is a market strata (ownership) unit and it is built as an infill
unit without any changes to the existing single family home on the lot.
 Scenario 4 assumes that the new laneway unit is a market strata (ownership) unit and it is built as part
of the redevelopment of the entire lot (i. E. A new single family home and laneway unit are built
simultaneously).
Each proforma includes two pages. The first page includes the assumptions and the second includes the
detailed calculations.
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 23
exhibit 7: scenario 1  infill rental laneway
major assumptions (shading indicates figures that are inputs; unshaded cells are formulas)
concept
site size 6,100 sq. Ft.
Additional density allowed for laneway house 0.16 far
laneway house floorspace 1,000 sq. Ft.
Surface parking stalls 1 stalls
share of existing lot dedicated to laneway house 25% or 1,525 sq. Ft.
Laneway house revenue
assumed laneway house value $675,000 or $675 per sq. Ft.
Pre-construction costs
rezoning application fee $0
construction costs
site work $50,000
connection fees (water, sewer, storm) $33,600
landscaping $20,000
hard cost used in analysis $455
soft costs 5.0% of hard costs, site prep/servicing costs
project management 5.0% of hard costs, site prep/servicing costs, soft costs, marketing
contingency on hard and soft costs 5.0% of hard and soft costs
local government levies
gvrd water and liquid waste levy $0 per unit
translink dccs $0 per unit
burnaby residential dccs $0 per unit
financing assumptions
financing rate on construction costs 3.5% on 50% of costs, assuming a 1.00 year construction period
and a total loan of 100% on costs
financing fees 1.5% of financed costruction costs
commissions
commissions/sales costs 0.0% of gross residential revenue
property taxes, gst and other fees
new home warranty fees $0 per unit
net gst on rental unit 5.0% of creation costs
tax rate 0.317% of assessed value
assumed assessment during construction $337,500 (50% of completed project value)
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 24
analysis
revenue
laneway house completed value $675,000
less commissions and sales costs $0
net sales revenue $675,000
project costs
rezoning application fee $0
site work $50,000
connection fees (water, sewer, storm) $33,600
landscaping $20,000
hard construction costs $455,000
soft costs $26,930
project management $28,277
contingency on hard and soft costs $30,690
gvrd water and liquid waste levy $0
translink dccs $0
burnaby residential dccs $0
less property tax allowance during development $1,070
new home warranty fees $0
construction financing $11,297
financing fees/costs $9,853
less net gst $33,336
total project costs before land related $700,053
profit analysis
profit -$25,053
profit on costs -4%
rental analysis
annual yield on costs 4.4%
interest rate 3.5%
effective monthly rate 0.3%
amortization 25 years
estimated monthly mortgage payment required to finance laneway creation $3,493
estimated monthly noi $2,539
difference in monthly mortgage payment and monthly noi -$955
land residual analysis (higher profit)
allowance for developer's profit 15.0% of total costs, or 13.0% of gross revenue
allowance for developer's profit $88,020
residual to land and land carry -$113,073
less financing on land during construction $0
less financing fee on land loan $0
less property closing costs $0
residual land value -$113,073
residual value per sq. Ft. Buildable (fsr) -$113
residual value per sq. Ft. Of site area -$19
land residual analysis (lower profit)
allowance for developer's profit 10.0% of total costs, or 9.1% of gross revenue
allowance for developer's profit $61,358
residual to land and land carry -$86,410
less financing on land during construction $0
less financing fee on land loan $0
less property closing costs $0
residual land value -$86,410
residual value per sq. Ft. Buildable (fsr) -$86
residual value per sq. Ft. Of site area -$14
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 25
exhibit 8: scenario 2  rental laneway as part of full lot redevelopment
major assumptions (shading indicates figures that are inputs; unshaded cells are formulas)
concept
site size 6,100 sq. Ft.
Additional density allowed for laneway house 0.16 far
laneway house floorspace 1,000 sq. Ft.
Surface parking stalls 1 stalls
share of existing lot dedicated to laneway house 25% or 1,525 sq. Ft.
Laneway house revenue
assumed laneway house value $675,000 or $675 per sq. Ft.
Pre-construction costs
rezoning application fee $0
construction costs
site work $50,000
connection fees (water, sewer, storm) $0
landscaping $10,000
hard cost used in analysis $405
soft costs 5.0% of hard costs, site prep/servicing costs
project management 3.0% of hard costs, site prep/servicing costs, soft costs, marketing
contingency on hard and soft costs 5.0% of hard and soft costs
local government levies
gvrd water and liquid waste levy $0 per unit
translink dccs $0 per unit
burnaby residential dccs $0 per unit
financing assumptions
financing rate on construction costs 3.5% on 50% of costs, assuming a 1.00 year construction period
and a total loan of 100% on costs
financing fees 1.5% of financed costruction costs
commissions
commissions/sales costs 0.0% of gross residential revenue
property taxes, gst and other fees
new home warranty fees $0 per unit
net gst on rental unit 5.0% of creation costs
tax rate 0.317% of assessed value
assumed assessment during construction $337,500 (50% of completed project value)
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 26
analysis
revenue
laneway house completed value $675,000
less commissions and sales costs $0
net sales revenue $675,000
project costs
rezoning application fee $0
site work $50,000
connection fees (water, sewer, storm) $0
landscaping $10,000
hard construction costs $405,000
soft costs $22,750
project management $14,333
contingency on hard and soft costs $25,104
gvrd water and liquid waste levy $0
translink dccs $0
burnaby residential dccs $0
less property tax allowance during development $1,070
new home warranty fees $0
construction financing $9,244
financing fees/costs $8,063
less net gst $27,278
total project costs before land related $572,841
profit analysis
profit $102,159
profit on costs 18%
rental analysis
annual yield on costs 5.3%
interest rate 3.5%
effective monthly rate 0.3%
amortization 25 years
estimated monthly mortgage payment required to finance laneway creation $2,859
estimated monthly noi $2,539
difference in monthly mortgage payment and monthly noi -$320
land residual analysis (higher profit)
allowance for developer's profit 15.0% of total costs, or 13.0% of gross revenue
allowance for developer's profit $88,020
residual to land and land carry $14,139
less financing on land during construction $460
less financing fee on land loan $7
less property closing costs $2,260
residual land value $11,411
residual value per sq. Ft. Buildable (fsr) $11
residual value per sq. Ft. Of site area $2
land residual analysis (lower profit)
allowance for developer's profit 10.0% of total costs, or 9.1% of gross revenue
allowance for developer's profit $61,358
residual to land and land carry $40,801
less financing on land during construction $1,328
less financing fee on land loan $20
less property closing costs $2,752
residual land value $36,702
residual value per sq. Ft. Buildable (fsr) $37
residual value per sq. Ft. Of site area $6
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 27
exhibit 9: scenario 3  infill strata laneway
major assumptions (shading indicates figures that are inputs; unshaded cells are formulas)
concept
site size 6,100 sq. Ft.
Additional density allowed for laneway house 0.16 far
laneway house floorspace 1,000 sq. Ft.
Surface parking stalls 1 stalls
share of existing lot dedicated to laneway house 25% or 1,525 sq. Ft.
Laneway house revenue
assumed laneway house sales price $1,150,000 or $1,150 per sq. Ft.
Pre-construction costs
rezoning application fee $0
construction costs
site work $50,000
connection fees (water, sewer, storm) $33,600
landscaping $20,000
hard cost used in analysis $455
soft costs 5.0% of hard costs, site prep/servicing costs
project management 5.0% of hard costs, site prep/servicing costs, soft costs, marketing
contingency on hard and soft costs 5.0% of hard and soft costs
local government levies
gvrd water and liquid waste levy $0 per unit
translink dccs $0 per unit
burnaby residential dccs $0 per unit
financing assumptions
financing rate on construction costs 3.5% on 50% of costs, assuming a 1.00 year construction period
and a total loan of 100% on costs
financing fees 1.5% of financed costruction costs
commissions
commissions/sales costs 2.9% of gross residential revenue
property taxes, gst and other fees
new home warranty fees $3,610 per unit
net gst on rental unit 0.0% of creation costs
tax rate 0.317% of assessed value
assumed assessment during construction $575,000 (50% of completed project value)
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 28
analysis
revenue
laneway house completed value $1,150,000
less commissions and sales costs $33,250
net sales revenue $1,116,750
project costs
rezoning application fee $0
site work $50,000
connection fees (water, sewer, storm) $33,600
landscaping $20,000
hard construction costs $455,000
soft costs $26,930
project management $28,277
contingency on hard and soft costs $30,690
gvrd water and liquid waste levy $0
translink dccs $0
burnaby residential dccs $0
less property tax allowance during development $1,822
new home warranty fees $3,610
construction financing $11,374
financing fees/costs $9,920
less net gst $0
total project costs before land related $671,222
profit analysis
profit $445,528
profit on costs 63%
allowance for impact on value of remainder of lot $117,700
profit after allowing for impact on remainder of lot $327,828
profit on costs after allowing for impact on remainder of lot 40%
land residual analysis (higher profit)
allowance for developer's profit 15.0% of total costs, or 13.0% of gross revenue
allowance for developer's profit $149,960
allowance for impact on value of remainder of lot $117,700
residual to land and land carry $177,868
less financing on land during construction $5,790
less financing fee on land loan $87
less property closing costs $5,276
residual land value $166,715
residual value per sq. Ft. Buildable (fsr) $167
residual value per sq. Ft. Of site area $27
land residual analysis (lower profit)
allowance for developer's profit 10.0% of total costs, or 9.1% of gross revenue
allowance for developer's profit $104,535
allowance for impact on value of remainder of lot $117,700
residual to land and land carry $223,293
less financing on land during construction $7,268
less financing fee on land loan $109
less property closing costs $6,113
residual land value $209,802
residual value per sq. Ft. Buildable (fsr) $210
residual value per sq. Ft. Of site area $34
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 29
exhibit 10: scenario 4  strata laneway as part of full lot redevelopment
major assumptions (shading indicates figures that are inputs; unshaded cells are formulas)
concept
site size 6,100 sq. Ft.
Additional density allowed for laneway house 0.16 far
laneway house floorspace 1,000 sq. Ft.
Surface parking stalls 1 stalls
share of existing lot dedicated to laneway house 25% or 1,525 sq. Ft.
Laneway house revenue
assumed laneway house sales price $1,150,000 or $1,150 per sq. Ft.
Pre-construction costs
rezoning application fee $0
construction costs
site work $50,000
connection fees (water, sewer, storm) $0
landscaping $10,000
hard cost used in analysis $405
soft costs 5.0% of hard costs, site prep/servicing costs
project management 3.0% of hard costs, site prep/servicing costs, soft costs, marketing
contingency on hard and soft costs 5.0% of hard and soft costs
local government levies
gvrd water and liquid waste levy $0 per unit
translink dccs $0 per unit
burnaby residential dccs $0 per unit
financing assumptions
financing rate on construction costs 3.5% on 50% of costs, assuming a 1.00 year construction period
and a total loan of 100% on costs
financing fees 1.5% of financed costruction costs
commissions
commissions/sales costs 2.9% of gross residential revenue
property taxes, gst and other fees
new home warranty fees $3,610 per unit
net gst on rental unit 0.0% of creation costs
tax rate 0.317% of assessed value
assumed assessment during construction $575,000 (50% of completed project value)
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 30
analysis
revenue
laneway house completed value $1,150,000
less commissions and sales costs $33,250
net sales revenue $1,116,750
project costs
rezoning application fee $0
site work $50,000
connection fees (water, sewer, storm) $0
landscaping $10,000
hard construction costs $405,000
soft costs $22,750
project management $14,333
contingency on hard and soft costs $25,104
gvrd water and liquid waste levy $0
translink dccs $0
burnaby residential dccs $0
less property tax allowance during development $1,822
new home warranty fees $3,610
construction financing $9,321
financing fees/costs $8,129
less net gst $0
total project costs before land related $550,069
profit analysis
profit $566,681
profit on costs 97%
allowance for impact on value of remainder of lot $117,700
profit after allowing for impact on remainder of lot $448,981
profit on costs after allowing for impact on remainder of lot 64%
land residual analysis (higher profit)
allowance for developer's profit 15.0% of total costs, or 13.0% of gross revenue
allowance for developer's profit $149,960
allowance for impact on value of remainder of lot $117,700
residual to land and land carry $299,021
less financing on land during construction $9,733
less financing fee on land loan $146
less property closing costs $7,508
residual land value $281,634
residual value per sq. Ft. Buildable (fsr) $282
residual value per sq. Ft. Of site area $46
land residual analysis (lower profit)
allowance for developer's profit 10.0% of total costs, or 9.1% of gross revenue
allowance for developer's profit $104,535
allowance for impact on value of remainder of lot $117,700
residual to land and land carry $344,446
less financing on land during construction $11,212
less financing fee on land loan $169
less property closing costs $8,345
residual land value $324,721
residual value per sq. Ft. Buildable (fsr) $325
residual value per sq. Ft. Of site area $53
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 31
6.3 summary proformas for laneway scenarios
this section includes summary proformas for each of the 28 laneway scenarios that we analyzed, organized
into the following groups:
 scenario 1 assumes that the new laneway unit is a market rental unit and is built as an infill unit without
any changes to the existing single family home on the lot.
 Scenario 2 assumes that the new laneway unit is a market rental unit and it is built as part of the
redevelopment of the entire lot (i. E. A new single family home and laneway unit are built simultaneously).
 Scenario 3 assumes that the new laneway unit is a market strata (ownership) unit and is built as an infill
unit without any changes to the existing single family home on the lot.
 Scenario 4 assumes that the new laneway unit is a market strata (ownership) unit and it is built as part
of the redevelopment of the entire lot (i. E. A new single family home and laneway unit are built
simultaneously).
Housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 32
exhibit 11: summary proformas for scenario 1  infill rental laneway
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
description
small lot in
a lower
value area
small lot in
a higher
value area
medium
lot in a
lower
value area
medium
lot in a
higher
value area
large lot in
a lower
value area
large lot
in a higher
value area
larger lot in
a higher
value area
block/address
5000 block
of norfolk
street
4100 block
of pandora
street
6700 block
of fulton
avenue
4000 block
of trinity
street
9200 block
of 10th
avenue
7200 block
of braeside
drive
7500 block
of colleen
street
location
douglas
road/
central
burnaby
burnaby
heights
highgate/
edmonds
burnaby
heights
cariboo/
east
burnaby
westridge government
road
zoning district r12 r12 r3 r3 r2 r2 r1
lot size (sf) 4,359 4,026 5,550 6,100 8,052 7,500 10,737
laneway unit size (sf) 650 650 1,000 1,000 1,200 1,200 1,400
assumed monthly rent $2,125 $2,225 $2,850 $3,000 $3,000 $3,150 $3,500
yield analysis
annual revenue $25,500 $26,700 $34,200 $36,000 $36,000 $37,800 $42,000
less annual operating costs $4,117 $4,117 $4,656 $4,814 $4,767 $4,957 $5,115
less allowance for vacancy $510 $534 $684 $720 $720 $756 $840
annual net operating
income $20,873 $22,049 $28,860 $30,466 $30,513 $32,087 $36,045
hard construction costs $378,750 $378,750 $455,000 $455,000 $485,000 $485,000 $565,000
other project costs $225,223 $225,266 $244,984 $245,053 $252,712 $252,781 $273,354
total project costs $603,973 $604,016 $699,984 $700,053 $737,712 $737,781 $838,354
calculated yield on costs 3.5% 3.7% 4.1% 4.4% 4.1% 4.3% 4.3%
land residual
analysis
capitalized value of rental
income $465,000 $490,000 $635,000 $675,000 $675,000 $715,000 $800,000
less hard construction costs $378,750 $378,750 $455,000 $455,000 $485,000 $485,000 $565,000
less other project costs $225,223 $225,266 $244,984 $245,053 $252,712 $252,781 $273,354
less allowance for
developers profit
10%
profit $42,269 $44,541 $57,722 $61,358 $61,358 $64,994 $72,720
15%
profit $60,636 $63,896 $82,804 $88,020 $88,020 $93,236 $104,320
less allowance for
land related costs
10%
profit $0 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0
15%
profit $0 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0
potential
supportable land
value
10%
profit $0 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0
15%
profit $0 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 33
exhibit 12: summary proformas for scenario 2  rental laneway as part of full lot redevelopment
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
description
small lot in
a lower
value area
small lot in
a higher
value area
medium
lot in a
lower
value area
medium
lot in a
higher
value area
large lot in
a lower
value area
large lot
in a higher
value area
larger lot in
a higher
value area
block/address
5000 block
of norfolk
street
4100 block
of pandora
street
6700 block
of fulton
avenue
4000 block
of trinity
street
9200 block
of 10th
avenue
7200 block
of braeside
drive
7500 block
of colleen
street
location
douglas
road/
central
burnaby
burnaby
heights
highgate/
edmonds
burnaby
heights
cariboo/
east
burnaby
westridge government
road
zoning district r12 r12 r3 r3 r2 r2 r1
lot size (sf) 4,359 4,026 5,550 6,100 8,052 7,500 10,737
laneway unit size (sf) 650 650 1,000 1,000 1,200 1,200 1,400
assumed monthly rent $2,125 $2,225 $2,850 $3,000 $3,000 $3,150 $3,500
yield analysis
annual revenue $25,500 $26,700 $34,200 $36,000 $36,000 $37,800 $42,000
less annual operating costs $4,117 $4,117 $4,656 $4,814 $4,767 $4,957 $5,115
less allowance for vacancy $510 $534 $684 $720 $720 $756 $840
annual net operating income $20,873 $22,049 $28,860 $30,466 $30,513 $32,087 $36,045
hard construction costs $346,250 $346,250 $405,000 $405,000 $455,000 $455,000 $530,000
other project costs $153,885 $153,928 $167,773 $167,841 $179,412 $179,481 $196,983
total project costs $500,135 $500,178 $572,773 $572,841 $634,412 $634,481 $726,983
calculated yield on costs 4.2% 4.4% 5.0% 5.3% 4.8% 5.1% 5.0%
land residual
analysis
capitalized value of rental
income $465,000 $490,000 $635,000 $675,000 $675,000 $715,000 $800,000
less hard construction costs $346,250 $346,250 $405,000 $405,000 $455,000 $455,000 $530,000
less other project costs $153,885 $153,928 $167,773 $167,841 $179,412 $179,481 $196,983
less allowance for
developers profit
10%
profit $42,269 $44,541 $57,722 $61,358 $61,358 $64,994 $72,720
15%
profit $60,636 $63,896 $82,804 $88,020 $88,020 $93,236 $104,320
less allowance for
land related costs
10%
profit $0 $0 $2 $4,100 $0 $2,799 $10
15%
profit $0 $0 $0 $2,728 $0 $0 $0
potential
supportable land
value
10%
profit $0 $0 $4,504 $36,702 $0 $12,727 $287
15%
profit $0 $0 $0 $11,411 $0 $0 $0
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 34
exhibit 13: summary proformas for scenario 3  infill strata laneway
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
description
small lot in
a lower
value area
small lot in
a higher
value area
medium
lot in a
lower
value area
medium
lot in a
higher
value area
large lot in
a lower
value area
large lot
in a higher
value area
larger lot in
a higher
value area
block/address
5000 block
of norfolk
street
4100 block
of pandora
street
6700 block
of fulton
avenue
4000 block
of trinity
street
9200 block
of 10th
avenue
7200 block
of braeside
drive
7500 block
of colleen
street
location
douglas
road/
central
burnaby
burnaby
heights
highgate/
edmonds
burnaby
heights
cariboo/
east
burnaby
westridge government
road
zoning district r12 r12 r3 r3 r2 r2 r1
lot size (sf) 4,359 4,026 5,550 6,100 8,052 7,500 10,737
laneway unit size (sf) 650 650 1,000 1,000 1,200 1,200 1,400
profit
analysis
unit value $730,000 $780,000 $1,075,000 $1,150,000 $1,260,000 $1,350,000 $1,470,000
less commission $22,750 $24,000 $31,375 $33,250 $36,000 $38,250 $41,250
less hard construction costs $378,750 $378,750 $455,000 $455,000 $485,000 $485,000 $530,000
less other project costs $200,624 $200,706 $216,100 $216,222 $222,269 $222,416 $231,412
less impact on remaining lot
value $82,750 $102,750 $92,994 $117,700 $79,294 $108,813 $115,931
calculated profit $45,126 $73,794 $279,532 $327,828 $437,437 $495,521 $551,406
calculated profit on costs 7% 10% 35% 40% 53% 58% 60%
land residual analysis
unit value $730,000 $780,000 $1,075,000 $1,150,000 $1,260,000 $1,350,000 $1,470,000
less commissions $22,750 $24,000 $31,375 $33,250 $36,000 $38,250 $41,250
less hard construction costs $378,750 $378,750 $455,000 $455,000 $485,000 $485,000 $530,000
less other project costs $200,624 $200,706 $216,100 $216,222 $222,269 $222,416 $231,412
less impact on remaining lot
value $82,750 $102,750 $92,994 $117,700 $79,294 $108,813 $115,931
less allowance
for developers
profit
10% profit $66,357 $70,902 $97,718 $104,535 $114,534 $122,715 $133,623
15% profit $95,192 $101,712 $140,180 $149,960 $164,304 $176,040 $191,688
less allowance
for land
related costs
10% profit $0 $97 $11,356 $13,491 $18,617 $21,185 $23,499
15% profit $0 $0 $9,171 $11,153 $16,055 $18,440 $20,511
potential
supportable
land value
10% profit zero $2,795 $170,458 $209,802 $304,287 $351,622 $394,284
15% profit zero zero $130,181 $166,715 $257,078 $301,041 $339,207
housing choices program: financial analysis for laneway units and suites in semis
page 35
exhibit 14: summary proformas for scenario 4  strata laneway as part of full lot redevelopment
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
description
small lot
in a lower
value area
small lot
in a higher
value area
medium lot
in a lower
value area
medium lot
in a higher
value area
large lot in
a lower
value area
large lot in
a higher
value area
larger lot in
a higher
value area
block/address
5000 block
of norfolk
street
4100 block
of pandora
street
6700 block
of fulton
avenue
4000 block
of trinity
street
9200 block
of 10th
avenue
7200 block
of braeside
drive
7500 block of
colleen
street
location
douglas
road/
central
burnaby
burnaby
heights
highgate/
edmonds
burnaby
heights
cariboo/
east
burnaby
westridge government
road
zoning district r12 r12 r3 r3 r2 r2 r1
lot size (sf) 4,359 4,026 5,550 6,100 8,052 7,500 10,737
laneway unit size (sf) 650 650 1,000 1,000 1,200 1,200 1,400
profit analysis
unit value $730,000 $780,000 $1,075,000 $1,150,000 $1,260,000 $1,350,000 $1,470,000
less commission $22,750 $24,000 $31,375 $33,250 $36,000 $38,250 $41,250
less hard construction costs $346,250 $346,250 $405,000 $405,000 $455,000 $455,000 $495,000
less other project costs $134,231 $134,312 $144,946 $145,069 $153,888 $154,035 $161,143
less impact on remaining
lot value $82,750 $102,750 $92,994 $117,700 $79,294 $108,813 $115,931
calculated profit $144,019 $172,688 $400,685 $448,981 $535,819 $593,903 $656,676
calculated profit on costs 25% 28% 59% 64% 74% 79% 81%
land residual analysis
unit value $730,000 $780,000 $1,075,000 $1,150,000 $1,260,000 $1,350,000 $1,470,000
less commissions $22,750 $24,000 $31,375 $33,250 $36,000 $38,250 $41,250
less hard construction costs $346,250 $346,250 $405,000 $405,000 $455,000 $455,000 $495,000
less other project costs $134,231 $134,312 $144,946 $145,069 $153,888 $154,035 $161,143
less impact on remaining
lot value $82,750 $102,750 $92,994 $117,700 $79,294 $108,813 $115,931
less
allowance for
developers
profit
10% profit $66,357 $70,902 $97,718 $104,535 $114,534 $122,715 $133,623
15% profit $95,192 $101,712 $140,180 $149,960 $164,304 $176,040 $191,688
less
allowance for
land related
costs
10% profit $5,996 $7,290 $17,591 $19,725 $23,679 $26,247 $28,916
15% profit $4,513 $5,652 $15,406 $17,388 $21,118 $23,503 $25,928
potential
supportable
land value
10% profit $71,666 $94,496 $285,377 $324,721 $397,605 $444,940 $494,137
15% profit $44,315 $65,323 $245,100 $281,634 $350,396 $394,359 $439,060

First nations referrals on
the housing choice program
referrals on the program were sent in march 2022 to the slilwta (tsleil-waututh) nation, the skwxwu7mesh 
uxwumixw (squamish nation), the xwmkwym (musqueam) indian band, and the kwikw
m (kwikwetlem) first
nation, on whose territories burnaby is located. The referrals provided information on the proposed housing types and
forthcoming consultation activities and invited comments and/or other engagement.
The slilwta (tsleil-waututh) nation and the kwikw
m (kwikwetlem) first nation had no comments at that time,
but asked to receive updates on the program. The skwxwu7mesh uxwumixw (squamish nation) had the following 
comments:
our climate action managers recommend the proponent consider the implementation of climate resilient
standards (e. G. , hepa smoke filters, passive cooling, and increased storm water drainage capacity) and ensure
the building design regulations incorporate future climate impacts (increased temperatures, increased risk to
fire and smoke, increased rainfall and wind, as well as changes to external flood risks). We also recommend
regulations ensure buildings are designed to net zero carbon emissions (considering clean power/heat, building
envelope, renewables, and embodied carbon) and the highest sustainability standards (including considerations
for water conservation, storm water management, waste management, transportation, environmental
conservation, and food security).
 We request further detail around how the project will seek to meet sustainability and climate standards.
 Our preference would be for more affordable housing options (such as the smaller units you mentioned)
over single family homes - from both a sustainability and equity perspective.
These comments are being considered in preparing the draft program recommendations. Staff will seek further input
from the host first nations on the draft program recommendations to ensure that they reflect their priorities.

City of burnaby
housing choices program  laneways
and suites in semi-detached homes
june 2022
design workshop
2
the city of burnaby is located on the ancestral and unceded homelands of the
hnqminmand skwxwu7mesh speaking people, and we would like to
extend appreciation for the opportunity to hold a meeting on this territory.
3
program overview
goal 1:
provide a varied range and
choice of living opportunities
within the city
goal 2:
establish increased
opportunities for ground
oriented housing
burnabys official community plan
10 year action plan for housing
the home strategy
goal: inclusive and livable neighbourhoods
 launched in february 2022
 will introduce missing middle housing to burnabys neighbourhoods
single family home mid-rise building
housing choices program
 launched in february 2022
 will introduce missing middle housing to burnabys neighbourhoods
fourplexes
phase
two
housing choices program
single family home mid-rise building
missing middle
 phase 1a: laneway homes and suites in semi-detached homes
 february 2022 - late spring 2023
laneway
homes
suites in
semis
phase 1a
housing choices program - phasing
 phase 1b: homes with two suites and fourplexes
 will start following implementation of phase 1a
homes
with two
suites
phase 1b
phase
two
single family home mid-rise building
fourplexes
housing choices program - phasing
 phase 2: full range of missing middle housing types
 will be implemented in conjunction with ocp update
laneway
homes
suites in
semis
homes
with two
suites
fourplexes
phase one phase two
single family home mid-rise building
housing choices program - phasing
12
survey
 launched march 2022
 2,550 responses
 laneway homes: 2,338
 suites in semis: 1,520
 additional choices: 1,733
broad
housing choices survey
 2,338 respondents
 high level of interest in building a
laneway home (69%)
 high level of interest in living in a
laneway home (59%)
 would use for family or rent it
 support for shared yards, or for no
yard requirement
 support for larger units and reduced
parking
reasons for building a laneway home
laneway homes: results
 1,520 responses
 similar responses to laneway
homes
 high level of interest in building
and living in suites in semis
 many plan to rent them or use
them for family
 support for larger units and
reduced parking
reason for building
secondary suites in semi-detached homes: results
16
todays workshop
 laneway homes
 suites in semi-detached homes
hearing from you
17
hearing from one another
18
stay open to new
ideas.
Listen when others
speak. (and listen to
understand).
Treat others with
respect and expect
the same in return.
Be bold  and have
fun!
Agenda
19
 context setting
 your hopes
 exploring options
 understanding preferences
 wrap up and next steps
creating the options
20
community,
stakeholder, and
partner input
existing policies and
plans
site and related
constraints
exploring whats possible
21
options exploration - primer
 diversity of design considerations
 exploring options in support of community priorities
 constraints and opportunities with burnabys urban fabric
22
23
building height and form
24
building area and lot coverage
25
location and
setbacks
26
entrances and
pathways
27
parking requirements
28
accessibility
29
family friendly units
30
healthy water systems
31
open spaces
32
additional community priorities
 affordability
 climate action
 urban design and laneway activation
 overlook and privacy
 livability
lot configurations
33
medium
50x110
small
33x110
large
60+ x 120+
laneway homes
 small lots
34
 site coverage
influencing
building size (650 square
feet)
 variations in
height, form,
parking,
setbacks
laneway homes  medium lots
35
 range of sizes
 variations in
height, form,
parking,
setbacks
laneway homes  large lots
36
 range of sizes
 variations in
height, form,
parking,
setbacks
suites in semi-detached houses
37
focus on:
 access to unit
 relationship with
principal
dwelling
 amount of
outdoor space
provided

1 housing choices survey results phase one open house housing choices is a city of burnaby program to introduce more housing variety to the citys single and two-family neighbourhoods. The fi rst phase of the housing choices program is focused on introducing laneway homes and secondary suites in semi-detached homes. In spring 2022, a public survey was conducted to provide input into the fi rst phase of the housing choices program. The purpose of the survey was to gather input on the regulations and design guidelines for laneway homes and secondary suites in semi-detached homes. It also gauged support for additional housing choices being considered for the program. The survey was open for three weeks, from march 23 to april 12, 2022. Postcards advertising the survey were sent to every household in burnaby. The survey was also publicised through social media, on the city website and in newspaper advertisements. The survey included three sections. Participants were provided with the option of answering one, two or all three sections. These included: 1. Laneway homes: questions about the design of laneway homes 2. Suites in semi-detached homes: questions about the design of secondary suites in semi-detached homes 3. Additional housing choices: questions about other program elements, including: single-family homes with two suites fourplexes on two-family properties cellar fl oor area provisions measures to maintain aff ordability pre-approved designs respondents were also asked to provide some demographic information such as their age, current housing situation and their connection to burnaby. Introduction survey purpose and distribution survey design city of burnaby planning department burnaby. Ca/housingchoices | housingchoices@burnaby. Ca laneway home suite in semi-detached home housing choices survey results phase one open house city of burnaby planning and development department burnaby. Ca/housingchoices | housingchoices@burnaby. Ca 2 survey response there were 2,550 responses to the survey. Responses for each section were as follows: laneway homes 2,338 responses suites in semi-detached homes 1,520 responses additional housing choices 1,733 responses responses were mapped by postal code. There were 367 respondents who either did not provide a postal code or who live outside the city. The map shows broad representation from across the city, with concentrations in some of the single and two family neighbourhoods, such as burnaby heights and capitol hill. Number of respondents 1 2 3 - 5 6 - 8 9 - 10 n e w w e s t m i n s t e r c o q u i t l a m v a n c o u v e r number of respondents 1 2 3 - 5 6 - 8 9 - 10 n e w w e s t m i n s t e r c o q u i t l a m v a n c o u v e r housing choices survey results phase one open house city of burnaby planning and development department burnaby. Ca/housingchoices | housingchoices@burnaby. Ca 3 the vast majority of respondents (93%) live in burnaby. Over a third (36%) work in burnaby. There were also a number of respondents (6%) who are interested in moving to burnaby. Respondents represented a broad range of ages. All of the 18+ categories, with the exception of the 18-24 year age group, were well represented, and reflect the citys adult age distribution as a whole. Connection to burnaby age a high proportion of respondents (71%) live in single-family homes. The proportion of owners, at 83%, was higher than the citywide proportion of 68%. Of those who live in single and two-family homes in burnaby, three quarters (76%) of respondents have access to a laneway. An additional 10% live on corner lots or double fronted lots, or live on laneways that are not currently constructed. 14% do not have any potential side or rear access to their property. Housing tenure owner (83%) renter (14%) other (3%) owner 83% renter 14% other 3% access to a laneway? Yes (76%) no (14%) no, but on corner (5%) double fronted lot (3%) unconstructed lane (2%) yes 76% no 14% 5% 3% 2% housing type single-family home (71%) apartment (14%) two-family home (5%) townhouse (5%) suite (2%) other (2%) single family home 71% apartment 14% 5% 5% 2%2%... 0.2% 2% 15% 23% 23% 20% 17% 0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% <18 18-24 25-34 35-44 45-54 55-64 65+ % of respondents age group 93% 36% 9% 6% 3% 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% live in burnaby work in burnaby attend school in burnaby moving to burnaby other % of respondents respondents housing choices survey results phase one open house city of burnaby planning and development department burnaby. Ca/housingchoices | housingchoices@burnaby. Ca 4 laneway homes are you interested in living in a laneway home? Are you interested in building a laneway home? If you built a laneway home, how would you use it? (select all that apply) there is a high level of interest in living in a laneway home. 59% of respondents stated that they are interested in living in this type of housing. The levels of interest are higher amongst those who are currently renting and younger age groups. There is a high level of interest in building in a laneway home. 69% of respondents stated that they are interested in building a laneway home. Respondents interested in building a laneway home were asked how they intended to use it. The most popular answer across all age groups was to use it for a family member (79%), closely followed by renting it out (66%). Some of the uses given for the other category included; art studio, home offi ce, nanny suite, short term rental, or as a possbile strata unit in the future. Yes 59% no 41% yes 69% no 31% 79% 66% 51% 38% 3% 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% for family rent it future use live in it other % of respondents 79% of renters expressed interest in living in a laneway home, compared to 56% of owners. 92% of 18-24 year olds and 72% of 25-34 year olds expressed interest in living in a laneway home, compared to 55-60% in other age groups. The level of interest in building a laneway home was fairly similar across all age groups with most interest coming from those in the younger (18-24 year) and mid-range (45-54 year) age groups, at 74% and 75% respectively. Housing choices survey results phase one open house city of burnaby planning and development department burnaby. Ca/housingchoices | housingchoices@burnaby. Ca 5 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 1 storey maximum up to 1.5 storeys up to 2 storeys up to 2.5 storeys 18-24 25-34 35-44 45-54 55-64 65 over how many storeys should be permitted for a laneway home? How many bedrooms should be permitted in a laneway home? There is support for laneway homes of various heights. Two storeys (40%) is the most popular, followed by two and a half storeys (33%). There was a correlation between the age of respondents and laneway home height (see chart below). Support for two storey laneway homes was similar across all age categories, whereas support for higher laneway homes (up to 2.5 storeys) was greater among younger respondents and decreased as respondents got older. There is support for larger laneway homes. 50% of respondents supported two bedroom laneway homes, with an additional 31% supporting three or more bedrooms. Support for two bedrooms laneway homes was similar laneway homes: size support for laneway home heights, by age 6% 13% 50% 31% 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% studio 1 2 3+ % of respondents number of bedrooms 7% 11% 40% 33% 8% 0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 1 1.5 2 2.5 other % of respondents number of storeys responses to other included building above a garage and/or adding a basement. Some noted that the height should be based on the height of the main house. Others noted that the height should be based on the laneway homes proximity to neighbouring properties to preserve views and privacy. From owners and renters, with a higher proportion of renters supporting laneway homes with 3+ bedrooms (44% of renters vs 29% of owners) 19% of respondents reported that laneway homes should be limited to one bedroom or studio size. 1 storey 1.5 storeys (additional attic space) 2 storeys 2.5 storeys (additional attic space) housing choices survey results phase one open house city of burnaby planning and development department burnaby. Ca/housingchoices | housingchoices@burnaby. Ca 6 laneway homes: parking how many parking spaces should be required for properties with a laneway home and a secondary suite? (3 dwelling units) the citys off-street parking standard is one space per dwelling unit, so this option would require 3 spaces for 3 dwelling units. Almost three quarters of respondents (72%) supported some reduction in off-street parking requirements. Would you support reduced parking requirements for properties with easy access to other transport options? A high proportion of respondents (66%) also supported reducing the off-street parking requirements for properties with laneway homes, if they are located close to other transport options, such as carshare, bikeshare, bus or skytrain. Most respondents reported that laneway homes should share a yard with the main house, or have no specific requirement for outdoor space. Support for requiring laneway homes to have their own yard area was higher among renters (32%) than owners (18%). What type of outdoor space should be required for a laneway home? (select all that apply) laneway homes: outdoor space yes 66% no 34% 44% 41% 26% 23% 7% 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% shared yard no requirement landscaping on lane own yard other % of respondents 27% 14% 31% 21% 7% 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 0 1 2 3 4+ % of survey respondents number of required parking spaces notably, renters showed similar support for having no required yard space (31%) or sharing a yard with the main home (34%). A high proportion of younger respondents supported having no requirement for private space for the laneway home. Approximately one quarter of respondents also supported landscaping along the lane. Requiring 2 spaces for 3 dwelling units was the most popular option (31%). It is notable that over one quarter of respondents (27%) would support having no off-street parking requirement, leaving it up to the homeowner to decide how many spaces to provide. Lk cycle transit rideshare/ ile/ carpooling cycle ransit housing choices survey results phase one open house city of burnaby planning and development department burnaby. Ca/housingchoices | housingchoices@burnaby. Ca 7 are you interested in living in a secondary suite in a semi-detached home? Are you interested in building a secondary suite in a semi-detached home? If you built a secondary suite in a semi-detached home, how would you use it? 46% of respondents stated that they were interested in living in this type of housing. This option was more popular amongst younger age groups and those who are currently renting. About half of respondents (51%) reported that they were interested in building a suite in a semi-detached home. Interest was similar across all age groups, though slightly higher (60%) amongst the 35-44 age group. The most popular reason for building a suite in a semi-detached home would be to rent it out (83%), closely followed by using it for a family member (79%). Secondary suites in semi-detached homes yes 46% no 54% yes 51% no 49% 83% 79% 47% 41% 3% 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% rent it family future to live in other % of survey respondents housing choices survey results phase one open house city of burnaby planning and development department burnaby. Ca/housingchoices | housingchoices@burnaby. Ca 8 how many bedrooms should be permitted in a suite in a semi-detached home? There was support for larger secondary suites. 45% of respondents supported suites with two bedrooms, and an additional 33% supported suites with 3 or more bedrooms. This is consistent with the laneway homes responses, indicating support for larger accessory units. Suites in semi-detached homes: size suites in semi-detached homes: parking how many parking spaces should be required for properties with a suite in a semi-detached home? (4 dwelling units) the citys off-street parking standard is one space per dwelling unit, so this option would require 4 spaces for 4 dwelling units. There is support for reducing the off-street parking requirements for semi-detached homes with secondary suites. 69% of respondents supported requiring 3 or less parking spaces. Would you support reduced parking requirements for properties with easy access to other transport options? Almost two thirds of respondents (64%) supported reducing the parking requirements for properties with easy access to other transport options such as carshare, bikeshare, bus or skytrain. Yes 64% no 36% 28% 28% 14% 24% 7% 0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 0 2 3 4 5+ % of survey respondents number of required parking spaces 6% 17% 45% 33% 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% studio 1 2 3+ % of survey respondents number of bedrooms there was a correlation between age and size, with the highest support for 3+ bedrooms coming from the 18-34 age groups, closely followed by the 45-54 age group. Both owners and renters supported larger suites, with higher support from renters for 3+ bedrooms. This includes 28% who support having no off-street parking requirement (0 required spaces). 31% supported requiring 4 or more parking spaces. This includes 24% who supported requiring 4 spaces, and 7% who supported requiring more than 4 spaces. Lk cycle transit rideshare/ ile/ carpooling cycle ransit housing choices survey results phase one open house city of burnaby planning and development department burnaby. Ca/housingchoices | housingchoices@burnaby. Ca 9 additional housing choices respondents were asked the following questions: do you think the city should permit single-family homes with two suites? Do you think the city should permit fourplexes on two-family properties? Do you think the city should change its zoning bylaw to support full cellars in r10 - single-family residential areas? Do you think the city should change its zoning bylaw to support full cellars in r11 - single-family residential areas? Do you think the city should change its zoning bylaw to support full cellars in r12 - single and two-family residential areas? Do you think the city should include measures in the housing choices program to help address affordability and limit speculation? Do you think the city should develop a program to share pre-approved designs? 54% 52% 61% 83% 49% 52% 56% 19% 18% 10% 11% 16% 25% 8% 10% 11% 8% 19% 15% 12% 6% 6% 6% 9% 5% 2% 13% 14% 12% 8% 12% 11% 5% 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% as shown below, all of these additional housing choices were supported by survey respondents. Note: the questions on full cellars were only posed to residents of the r10, r11 and r12 zoning districts, so had a smaller sample size. These districts include 1,380, 113, and 859 properties, respectively. The response rates for these questions, based on number of households, was 10%, 21% and 7%, respectively. Homes with two suites fourplexes cellars in r10 zones cellars in r11 zones cellars in r12 zones affordability measures pre-approved designs strongly agree somewhat agree neutral strongly disagree somewhat disagree housing choices survey results phase one open house city of burnaby planning and development department burnaby. Ca/housingchoices | housingchoices@burnaby. Ca 10 lakeview - mayfield brentwood clinton - glenwood windsor sussex - nelson big bend willingdon heights parkcrest - aubrey cascade - schou garden village burnaby lake dawson - delta ardingley - sprott maywood cameron burnaby mountain morley - buckingham edmonds stride avenue marlborough burnaby heights suncrest kingsway - beresford government road westridge lyndhurst richmond park sperling - broadway lochdale stride hill oakalla capitol hill douglas - gilpin cariboo - armstrong lake city west central valley second street permit single family home with 2 suites? Agree (strongly agree, somewhat agree) disagree (strongly disagree, somewhat disagree) neutral n e w w e s t m i n s t e r c o q u i t l a m v a n c o u v e r notes: 1. Neighbourhood boundaries are the city of burnabys planning study areas (psas) 2. Sample size varies by psa. Do you think the city should permit single-family homes with two suites? Housing choices survey results phase one open house city of burnaby planning and development department burnaby. Ca/housingchoices | housingchoices@burnaby. Ca 11 do you think the city should permit fourplexes on two-family properties? Lakeview - mayfield brentwood clinton - glenwood windsor sussex - nelson big bend willingdon heights parkcrest - aubrey cascade - schou garden village burnaby lake dawson - delta ardingley - sprott maywood cameron burnaby mountain morley - buckingham edmonds stride avenue marlborough burnaby heights suncrest kingsway - beresford government road westridge lyndhurst richmond park sperling - broadway lochdale stride hill oakalla capitol hill douglas - gilpin cariboo - armstrong lake city west central valley second street permit fourplex on two-family properties? Agree (strongly agree, somewhat agree) disagree (strongly disagree, somewhat disagree) neutral n e w w e s t m i n s t e r coquitlam vancouver notes: 1. Neighbourhood boundaries are the city of burnabys planning study areas (psas) 2. Sample size varies by psa. Housing choices survey results phase one open house city of burnaby planning and development department burnaby. Ca/housingchoices | housingchoices@burnaby. Ca 12 please place sticky notes with your comments here. Tell us what you think 1. Place sticky notes with your comments here. 2. Visit our website: burnaby. Ca/housingchoices or scan the qr code to discuss. 3. Email your comments to housingchoices@burnaby. Ca 4. Mail your written comments to the address below: planning and development department community planning division attn: housing choices 4949 canada way burnaby, bc v5g 1m2 other ways to get involved

Meeting 2022 February 14
COUNCIL REPORT
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
HIS WORSHIP, THE MAYOR
AND COUNCILLORS
SUBJECT: HOUSING CHOICES: LANEWAY HOMES AND SUITES IN SEMIDETACHED HOUSES
RECOMMENDATIONS:
1. THAT Council approve the process to develop regulations and guidelines for:
a) laneway homes in single family areas;
b) additional accessory dwellings in single family homes without a laneway
home; and
c) two suites in semi-detached homes or four-plexes in duplex zoned lots.
2. THAT staff explore the affordability aspect of allowing increased densification in
single and two family zoned areas.
REPORT
The Planning and Development Committee, at its meeting held on 2022 February 02,
received and adopted the attached report outlining a process to develop regulations and
guidelines for laneway homes and secondary suites in semi-detached houses, as a first
step in implementing the Housing Choices program.
Arising from discussion, the Committee AMENDED the recommendation to develop
regulations and guidelines for a) laneway homes in single family areas; b) additional
accessory dwellings in single family homes without a laneway home; and c) two suites in
semi-detached homes or four-plexes in duplex zoned lots, and added recommendation
No. 2 directing staff to explore the affordability aspect of allowing increased densification
in single and two family zoned areas.
Respectfully submitted,
Councillor P. Calendino
Chair
Councillor S. Dhaliwal
Vice Chair
Copied to: Chief Administrative Officer
Deputy CAO / CFO
GM Corporate Services
GM Engineering
GM Planning and Development
City Solicitor
Chief Building Inspector
City of
Burnaby
Meeting 2022 February 02
COMMITTEE REPORT
TO: CHAIR AND MEMBERS
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
COMMITTEE
FROM: GENERAL MANAGER
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
DATE: 2022 January 27
FILE: 4500 20
SUBJECT: HOUSING CHOICES: LANEWAY HOMES AND SUITES IN SEMI
DETACHED HOUSES
PURPOSE: To outline a process to develop regulations and guidelines for laneway homes
and secondary suites in semi-detached houses as a first step in implementing the
Housing Choices program.
RECOMMENDATION:
1. THAT the Committee recommend that Council approve the process to develop
regulations and guidelines for laneway homes and secondary suites in semi-detached
houses, as outlined in this report.
REPORT
1.0 INTRODUCTION
On 2021 December 06, Council adopted HOME: Burnaby's Housing and Homelessness Strategy
(HOME Strategy), a ten year action plan for housing in Bumaby. Action 1.1 of the HOME Strategy
calls for the City to implement a program to introduce more infill housing choices to Bumaby. The
first phase of this program (to be known as the "Housing Choices" program) includes the
introduction of laneway homes and suites in semi-detached houses ("suites in semis").
On 2021 Febmary 22, Council received the Burnaby Housing Needs Report, which identified a
need for more rental housing and more housing choices for those seeking ground-oriented housing
in walkable, residential neighbourhoods.
On 2019 July 29, Council adopted the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community
Housing, including Recommendation #1 to develop a plan for introducing new housing forms and
family oriented housing in a variety of neighbourhoods.
On 2018 December 3, Council adopted a motion to examine the ability to facilitate laneway homes
in single family zones and secondary suites in duplexes (semi-detached houses).
To: Planning and Development Committee
From: General Manager Planning and Development
Re: Housing Choices: Laneway Homes and
Suites in Semi-detached Houses
2022 January 27. Page 2
This report outlines a process to develop regulations and guidelines for laneway homes and
secondary suites in semis, as a first step in implementing a broader infill housing program, called
the "Housing Choices" program. Additional types of infill housing will be reviewed in future
phases of the Housing Choices program, and in conjunction with the upcoming update to the
Official Community Plan (OCP).
2.0 POLICY SECTION
The Housing Choices program generally aligns with the following Council adopted plans, reports
and policies: Corporate Strategic Plan (2017), the Official Community Plan (1998), HOME:
Burnaby's Housing and Homelessness Strategy (2021), Burnaby 's Housing Needs Report (2021),
and the Mayor's Task Force on Community Housing Recommendations Report (2019).
3.0 HOUSING CHOICES PROGRAM
Housing Choices is a multi-phased, multi-year program to introduce new housing forms to
Bumaby's neighbourhoods. It will focus on missing middle housing, which includes duplexes,
triplexes, fourplexes, sixplexes, courtyard clusters, rowhomes, townhomes and low-rise
apartments, and will also introduce accessory units such as flex suites, secondary suites and
laneway homes.
The Housing Choices program will begin by introducing laneway homes and suites in semis into
single and two-family zone districts, respectively. Similar reviews will be undertaken for other
housing types in the Housing Choices program in conjunction with the OCP update.
4.0 LANEWAY HOMES AND SUITES IN SEMIS: PROGRAM DESCRIPTION
The work outlined in this section will result in detailed regulations and guidelines for laneway
homes and suites in semis. It will determine technical requirements to support building design,
address parking and servicing needs, and will require amendments to the OCP and the Burnaby
Zoning Bylaw. In order to address community needs and concerns, a consultation process seeking
input on design considerations and publicizing the program will accompany this work. Key
elements of the implementation process for laneway homes and suites in semis are reviewed in
this section; a step-by-step outline of the process and schedule is provided in Section 5.0 below.
Although many specifics will be developed during the process, the basic parameters for these
housing types are outlined in Table 1 below.
To: Planning and Development Committee
From: General Manager Planning and Development
Re: Housing Choices: Laneway Homes and
Suites in Semi-detached Houses
2022 January 27. Page 3
Table 1: Housing l^pes
Description Principal
Building
Type
Location on
Lot
Maximum Units
per Lot
Laneway
Homes
A detached dwelling
imit that is located on
the same lot as a
single family home.
Single
family
dwelling
In the rear
yard, facing a
lane
Three:
• Single family
dwelling
• Secondary suite
• Laneway home
Suites in Semis A self-contained,
secondary dwelling
unit located within a
semi-detached imit.
Twofamily
dwelling
Within a semi
detached
dwelling
Four:
• Two semi
detached units
• Secondary
dwelling in each
unit of the semi
detached
dwelling.
The work outlined in this report will focus on permitting laneway homes on single-family
properties that have access to a constructed laneway, and permitting suites in semi-detached houses
on two-family properties that have access to a constructed laneway. Permitted zoning districts,
access requirements, minimum lot dimensions, and other criteria will be determined during the
review.
Public Consultation
The Housing Choices program will be publicized via the City's website and social media
platforms. A dedicated webpage will be set up to provide information on the process, with options
to sign up for updates, ask questions and provide comments. There will be opportunities for public
input throughout the process.
A public survey will be launched to raise awareness, gather feedback on some of the key design
elements (parking, size and height of laneway homes), and to invite volunteers to sign up for design
workshops. The design workshops will provide a more detailed forum to listen and share ideas,
and will be used to determine the finer details of the program. When the draft program has been
developed, a series of Open Houses (potentially virtual, depending on the public health guidance
available at the time) will be held to present information and gather any ftirther feedback before
the program is finalized.
To: Planning and Development Committee
From: General Manager Planning and Development
Re: Housing Choices: Laneway Homes and
Suites in Semi-detached Houses
2022 January 27. Page 4
Technical Review
A technical review will be undertaken to develop program elements such as addressing, servicing,
and to determine lot suitability. It will also include a design review to establish key regulations
such as unit size, height and massing, setbacks and access, landscaping and parking configuration.
Guidelines will be developed to support high quality, accessible, sustainable design. A financial
analysis will also be undertaken to ensure the feasibility of different policy approaches, such as
measures to support the retention of existing buildings and to minimize land speculation.
Official Community Plan Amendment
Bumaby's Official Community Plan (OCP) supports increasing housing choices and calls for more
ground-oriented housing across the City. However, when the OCP was adopted in 1998, suites in
semis were not yet permitted by the BC Building Code and laneway homes were less common. As
a result, these forms of housing and their resulting densities are not specifically identified in the
current Residential Framework. An OCP bylaw amendment will be required to support this work.
Bylaw Amendments
In order to permit and regulate laneway homes and suites in semis, amendments to the Bumaby
Zoning Bylaw will be required. Specific amendments would include:
• Addition of definitions for the new uses;
• Addition of laneway homes and suites in semis as permitted uses in suitable zone districts;
• Addition of setback, height, floor area, off-street parking and other regulations; and
• Revision of existing bylaw provisions to reflect the new uses and incorporate any
necessary changes and additions.
In addition, amendments to other City bylaws may be required, such as the Building Bylaw and
the Fees Bylaw.
Implementation and Monitoring
Implementation will involve establishing the development review process, staff training, and the
preparation of forms, procedures, and information guides for efficient processing of applications.
This will also involve setting up mapping and data collection procedures to manage, monitor and
report on program outcomes.
4.0 PROCESS AND SCHEDULE
An overview of the process and schedule to implement laneway homes and suites in semis is shown
in Table 2, below.
To: Planning and Development Committee
From: General Manager Planning and Development
Re: Housing Choices: Laneway Homes and
Suites in Semi-detached Houses
2022 January 27. Page 5
Table 2: Schedule to Implement Laneway Homes and Suites in Semis
# ■Task - ^ Description Schedule
1. Public Consultation 1 Launch survey to raise awareness and collect
public input on key design elements (e.g., ofFstreet parking, height, size, outdoor space).
Notify and seek engagement with local First
Nations.
Winter
2021/22
2. Technical Review Undertake technical reviews to develop
recommendations for program elements such as
servicing, building height and size, ofF-street
parking and requirements for outdoor space.
This will also include a review oF the financial
implications of different policy approaches.
Spring 2022
3. Public Consultation 2 Host design workshops to gather input from the
public, the development community, staff, and
other housing stakeholders.
Spring/
Summer 2022
4. Draft Program Develop draft regulations and circulate intemally
for review and input.
Summer 2022
5. Public Consultation 3 Host Open Houses (potentially virtual) to present
the draft program, seek feedback, and answer
questions.
Fall 2022
6. Final Program Present the final program to Council. Winter
2022/23
7. OCP Amendments Amend the Official Community Plan to support
the program.
Winter
2022/23
8. Bylaw Amendments Amend the Zoning Bylaw and other City bylaws,
as needed, to support the program.
Winter
2022/23
9. Implementation and
Monitoring
Launch the approvals process and distribute
communications materials. Monitor progress.
Spring
2023;
monitoring to
continue with
annual
reporting.
To: Planning and Development Committee
From: General Manager Planning and Development
Re: Housing Choices: Laneway Homes and
Suites in Semi-detached Houses
2022 January 27. Page 6
5.0 CELLAR PROVISIONS - RIO, Rll, R12 DISTRICTS
As the proposed process for suites in two-family dwellings and laneway homes includes a robust
public consultation component, it is considered appropriate and timely to consider extending the
recently adopted cellar provisions for R Districts to include the RIO, Rll, R12 Districts. Doing
so would allow for an equal application of these provisions across all single and two-family
districts. As such, it is recommended that staff be authorized to consult on this in concert with the
foregoing work on laneway homes and suites in semi-detached houses.
6.0 CONCLUSION
This report provides an overview of the work process to begin the first phase of the Housing
Choices program, which will implement Action 1.1 of the HOME Strategy. This work will result
in regulations and guidelines to permit the development of laneway homes and suites in semis.
Under the proposed process, it is anticipated that the bylaw amendments required to support these
two new forms of housing would be brought to Council in winter 2022/23, followed by
implementation in spring 2023.
E.W. Kozak, General Manager
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
SC:sa
Copied to: Chief Administrative Officer
Deputy Chief Administrative Officer and Chief Financial Officer
General Manager Corporate Services
General Manager Engineering
City Clerk
City Solicitor
Chief Building Inspector
R:'Ltmg Range Clerical\DOCS^€ommttlee Reporls\2022\Housmg Choices-lMnevay Homes & Suites in Seml-tlelachedHouses p022.02.02).docx